                                                     BEATRICE M. HINKLE.


 =10 Gramercy Park.=

                             AUTHOR’S NOTE



My task in this work has been to investigate an individual phantasy
system, and in the doing of it problems of such magnitude have been
uncovered, that my endeavor to grasp them in their entirety has
necessarily meant only a superficial orientation toward those paths, the
opening and exploration of which may possibly crown the work of future
investigators with success.

I am not in sympathy with the attitude which favors the repression of
certain possible working hypotheses because they are perhaps erroneous,
and so may possess no lasting value. Certainly I endeavored as far as
possible to guard myself from error, which might indeed become
especially dangerous upon these dizzy heights, for I am entirely aware
of the risks of these investigations. However, I do not consider
scientific work as a dogmatic contest, but rather as a work done for the
increase and deepening of knowledge.

This contribution is addressed to those having similar ideas concerning
science.

In conclusion, I must render thanks to those who have assisted my
endeavors with valuable aid, especially my dear wife and my friends, to
whose disinterested assistance I am deeply indebted.

                                                             C. G. JUNG.


 ZURICH.

                                CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE


        AUTHOR’S NOTE                                                xlvii

                                  PART I


 CHAPTER

        INTRODUCTION                                                     3

        Relation of the Incest Phantasy to the Oedipus Legend—Moral
        revulsion over such a discovery—The unity of the antique and
        modern psychology—Followers of Freud in this field—The need
        of analyzing historical material in relation to individual
        analysis.

 I.—    CONCERNING THE TWO KINDS OF THINKING                             8


        Antiquity of the belief in dreams—Dream-meanings
        psychological, not literal—They concern wish-fulfilments—A
        typical dream: the sexual assault—What is symbolic in our
        every-day thinking?—One kind of thinking: intensive and
        deliberate, or directed—Directed thinking and thinking in
        words—Origin of speech in primitive nature sounds—The
        evolution of speech—Directed thinking a modern
        acquisition—Thinking, not directed, a thinking in images:
        akin to dreaming—Two kinds of thinking: directed and dream
        or phantasy thinking—Science an expression of directed
        thinking—The discipline of scholasticism as a
        forerunner—Antique spirit created not science but
        mythology—Their world of subjective phantasies similar to
        that we find in the childmind of to-day; or in the
        savage—The dream shows a similar type—Infantile thinking and
        dreams a re-echo of the prehistoric and the ancient—The
        myths a mass-dream of the people: the dream the myth of the
        individual—Phantastic thinking concerns wishes—Typical
        cases, showing kinship with ancient myths—Psychology of man
        changes but slowly—Phantastic thinking tells us of mythical
        or other material of undeveloped and no longer recognized
        wish tendencies in the soul—The sexual base—The wish,
        because of its disturbing nature, expressed not directly,
        but symbolically.

 II.—   THE MILLER PHANTASIES                                           42


        Miss Miller’s unusual suggestibility—Identifying herself
        with others—Examples of her autosuggestibility and
        suggestive effect—Not striking in themselves, but from
        analytic viewpoint they afford a glance into the soul of the
        writer—Her phantasies really tell of the history of her
        love.

 III.—  THE HYMN OF CREATION                                            49


        Miss Miller’s description of a sea-journey—Really a
        description of “introversion”—A retreat from reality into
        herself—The return to the real world with erotic impression
        of officer singing in the night-watch—The undervaluing of
        such erotic impressions—Their often deep effect—The
        succeeding dream, and poem—The denied erotic impression
        usurps an earlier transference: it expresses itself through
        the Father-Imago—Analysis of the poem—Relation to Cyrano,
        Milton and Job—The attempt to escape the problem by a
        religious and ethical pose—Contrast with real
        religion—Escape from erotic by transference to a God or
        Christ—This made effective by mutual transference: “Love one
        another”—The erotic spiritualized, however—The inner
        conflict kept conscious by this method—The modern, however,
        represses the conflict and so becomes neurotic—The function
        of Christianity—Its biologic purpose fulfilled—Its forms of
        thought and wisdom still available.

 IV.—   THE SONG OF THE MOTH                                            87


        The double rôle of Faust: creator and destroyer—“I came not
        to send peace, but a sword”—The modern problem of choice
        between Scylla of world-renunciation and Charybdis of
        world-acceptance—The ethical pose of The Hymn of Creation
        having failed, the unconscious projects a new attempt in the
        Moth-Song—The choice, as in Faust—The longing for the sun
        (or God) the same as that for the ship’s officer—Not the
        object, however: the longing is important—God is our own
        longing to which we pay divine honors—The failure to replace
        by a real compensation the libido-object which is
        surrendered, produces regression to an earlier and discarded
        object—A return to the infantile—The use of the parent
        image—It becomes synonymous with God, Sun, Fire—Sun and
        snake—Symbols of the libido gathered into the sun-symbol—The
        tendency toward unity and toward multiplicity—One God with
        many attributes: or many gods that are attributes of
        one—Phallus and sun—The sun-hero, the well-beloved—Christ as
        sun-god—“Moth and sun” then brings us to historic depths of
        the soul—The sun-hero creative and destructive—Hence: Moth
        and Flame: burning one’s wings—The destructiveness of being
        fruitful—Wherefore the neurotic withdraws from the conflict,
        committing a sort of self-murder—Comparison with Byron’s
        Heaven and Earth.

                                  PART II


 I.—    ASPECTS OF THE LIBIDO                                          127


        A backward glance—The sun the natural god—Comparison with
        libido—Libido, “sun-energy”—The sun-image as seen by the
        mystic in introversion—The phallic symbol of the
        libido—Faust’s key—Mythical heroes with phallic
        attributes—These heroes personifications of the human libido
        and its typical fates—A definition of the word “libido”—Its
        etymological context.

 II.—   THE CONCEPTION AND THE GENETIC THEORY OF LIBIDO                139


        A widening of the conception of libido—New light from the
        study of paranoia—The impossibility of restricting the
        conception of libido to the sexual—A genetic definition—The
        function of reality only partly sexual—Yet this, and other
        functions, originally derivations from procreative
        impulse—The process of transformation—Libido, and the
        conception of will in general—Examples in mythology—The
        stages of the libido: its desexualized derivatives and
        differentiations—Sublimation vs. repression—Splittings off
        of the primal libido—Application of genetic theory of libido
        to introversion psychoses—Replacing reality by archaic
        surrogates—Desexualizing libido by means of phantastic
        analogy formations—Possibly human consciousness brought to
        present state in this manner—The importance of the little
        phrase: “Even as.”

 III.—  THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE LIBIDO. A POSSIBLE SOURCE OF         157


        PRIMITIVE HUMAN DISCOVERIES

        An example of transition of the libido—Act of boring with
        forefinger: an infantile presexual activity—Similar
        activities in patient’s early childhood—Outcome in dementia
        præcox—Its phantasies related to mythological products: a
        reproduction of the creations of antiquity—The freeing of
        libido from the nutritive to enter the sexual function—The
        epoch of suckling and the epoch of displaced rhythmic
        activity—These followed by the beginnings of onanistic
        attempts—An obstacle in the sexual zone produces regression
        to a previous mode—These regressions easier in earlier
        stages of humanity than now—The ethnological phantasy of
        boring—Examples—The production of fire—Its sexual
        significance—A substitute for coitus—The invention of
        fire-making then due to the need of supplying a symbol for
        the sexual act—The psychological compulsion for such
        transitions of the libido based on an original division of
        the will—Regression to incestuous—Prohibition here sends
        incestuous component of libido back to presexual—Character
        of its application here—The substitution of Mother-Earth for
        the parent—Also of infantile boring—Leading then to
        discovery of fire—An example in Hindoo literature—The sexual
        significance of the mouth—Its other function: the mating
        call—The regression which produced fire through boring also
        elaborated the mating call—The beginnings of speech—Example
        from the Hindoo—Speech and fire the first fruits of
        transformation of libido—The fire-preparation regarded as
        forbidden, as robbery—The forbidden thing onanism—Onanism a
        cheating of sexuality of its purpose—The ceremonial
        fire-production a substitute for the possibility of
        onanistic regression—Thus a transformation of libido ensues.

 IV.—   THE UNCONSCIOUS ORIGIN OF THE HERO                             191


        The cause of introversion—The forward and backward flow of
        the libido—The abnormal third—The conflict rooted in the
        incest problem—The “terrible mother”—Miss Miller’s
        introversion—An internal conflict—Its product of hypnagogic
        vision and poem—The uniformity of the unconscious in all
        men—The unconscious the object of a true psychology—The
        individual tendency with its production of the hero cult—The
        love for the hero or god a love for the unconscious—A
        turning back to the mother of humanity—Such regressions act
        favorably within limits—Miss Miller’s mention of the
        Sphinx—Theriomorphic representations of the libido—Their
        tendency to represent father and mother—The Sphinx
        represents the fear of the mother—Miss Miller’s mention of
        the Aztec—Analysis of this figure—The significance of the
        hand symbolically—The Aztec a substitute for the Sphinx—The
        name Chi-wan-to-pel—The connection of the anal region with
        veneration—Chiwantopel and Ahasver, the Wandering Jew—The
        parallel with Chidher—Heroes generating themselves through
        their own mothers—Analogy with the Sun—Setting and rising
        sun: Mithra and Helios, Christ and Peter, Dhulqarnein and
        Chidher—The fish symbol—The two Dadophores: the two
        thieves—The mortal and immortal parts of man—The Trinity
        taken from phallic symbolism—Comparison of libido with
        phallus—Analysis of libido symbolism always leads back to
        the mother incest—The hero myth the myth of our own
        suffering unconscious—Faust.

 V.—    SYMBOLISM OF THE MOTHER AND OF REBIRTH                         233


        The crowd as symbol of mystery—The city as symbol of the
        mother—The motive of continuous “union”—The typical journey
        of the sun-hero—Examples—A longing for rebirth through the
        mother—The compulsion to symbolize the mother as City, Sea,
        Source, etc.—The city as terrible mother and as holy
        mother—The relation of the water-motive to rebirth—Of the
        tree-motive—Tree of life a mother-image—The bisexual
        character of trees—Such symbols to be understood
        psychologically, not anatomically—The incestuous desire aims
        at becoming a child again, not at incest—It evades incest by
        creating myths of symbolic rebirth—The libido spiritualized
        through this use of symbols—To be born of the spirit—This
        compulsion toward symbolism brings a release of forces bound
        up in incest—This process in Christianity—Christianity with
        its repression of the manifest sexual the negative of the
        ancient sexual cult—The unconscious transformation of the
        incest wish into religious exercise does not meet the modern
        need—A conscious method necessary, involving moral
        autonomy—Replacing belief by understanding—The history of
        the symbolism of trees—The rise of the idea of the terrible
        mother a mask of the incest wish—The myth of Osiris—Related
        examples—The motive of “devouring”—The Cross of Christ: tree
        of death and tree of life—Lilith: the devouring mother—The
        Lamias—The conquering of the mother—Snake and dragon: the
        resistance against incest—The father represents the active
        repulse of the incest wish of the son—He frequently becomes
        the monster to be overcome by the hero—The Mithraic
        sacrificing of the incest wish an overcoming of the mother—A
        replacing of archaic overpowering by sacrifice of the
        wish—The crucified Christ an expression of this
        renunciation—Other cross sacrifices—Cross symbol possesses
        significance of “union”—Child in mother’s womb: or man and
        mother in union—Conception of the soul a derivative of
        mother imago—The power of incest prohibition created the
        self-conscious individual—It was the coercion to
        domestication—The further visions of Miss Miller.

 VI.—   THE BATTLE FOR DELIVERANCE FROM THE MOTHER                     307


        The appearance of the hero Chiwantopel on horseback—Hero and
        horse equivalent of humanity and its repressed libido—Horse
        a libido symbol, partly phallic, partly maternal, like the
        tree—It represents the libido repressed through the incest
        prohibition—The scene of Chiwantopel and the
        Indian—Recalling Cassius and Brutus: also delirium of
        Cyrano—Identification of Cassius with his mother—His
        infantile disposition—Miss Miller’s hero also infantile—Her
        visions arise from an infantile mother transference—Her hero
        to die from an arrow wound—The symbolism of the arrow—The
        onslaught of unconscious desires—The deadly arrows strike
        the hero from within—It means the state of introversion—A
        sinking back into the world of the child—The danger of this
        regression—It may mean annihilation or new life—Examples of
        introversion—The clash between the retrogressive tendency in
        the individual unconscious and the conscious forward
        striving—Willed introversion—The unfulfilled sacrifice in
        the Miller phantasy means an attempt to renounce the mother:
        the conquest of a new life through the death of the old—The
        hero Miss Miller herself.

 VII.—  THE DUAL MOTHER ROLE                                           341


        Chiwantopel’s monologue—His quest for the “one who
        understands”—A quest for the mother—Also for the
        life-companion—The sexual element in the wish—The battle for
        independence from the mother—Its peril—Miss Miller’s use of
        Longfellow’s Hiawatha—An analysis of Hiawatha—A typical hero
        of the libido—The miraculous birth—The hero’s birth symbolic
        because it is really a rebirth from the mother-spouse—The
        twofold mother which in Christian mythology becomes twofold
        birth—The hero his own procreator—Virgin conception a mask
        for incestuous impregnation—Hiawatha’s early life—The
        identification of mother-nature with the mother—The killing
        of a roebuck a conquering of the parents—He takes on their
        strength—He goes forth to slay the father in order to
        possess the mother—Minnehaha, the mother—Hiawatha’s
        introversion—Hiding in the lap of nature really a return to
        the mother’s womb—The regression to the presexual revives
        the importance of nutrition—The inner struggle with the
        mother, to overpower and impregnate her—This fight against
        the longing for the mother brings new strength—The Mondamin
        motive in other myths—The Savior-hero the fruit of the
        entrance of the libido into the personal maternal
        depths—This is to die, and be born again—Hiawatha’s struggle
        with the fish-monster—A new deliverance from the mother—And
        so again with Megissogwon, the Magician—The hero must again
        and again conquer the mother—Then follows his marriage with
        Minnehaha—Other incidents, his death: the sinking of the sun
        in the west—Miss Miller also reminded by Chiwantopel’s
        longing of Wagner’s Siegfried—Analysis of the Siegfried
        myth—The treasure-guarding dragon—The dragon the son’s
        repressed longing for the mother—Symbolism of the cave—The
        separation from the mother, the hero’s conquering of the
        dragon—The symbolism of the cup—Drinking from the mother—Cup
        of the blood of Christ—The resultant mysterious union of
        man—Profane interpretations of this mystery—The phallic
        significance of the serpent—The snake as representing the
        introverting libido—Self-procreation: or creation of the
        world through introversion—The world thus an emanation of
        the libido—The hero himself a serpent—The psychoanalytic
        treatment of regression—The hidden libido touched upon
        causes a struggle: that is, the hero fights the fight with
        the treasure-guarding dragon—The awakening of
        Brunhilde—Siegfried finding his mother: a symbol of his own
        libido—The conquest of the terrible mother brings the love
        and life-giving mother.

 VIII.— THE SACRIFICE                                                  428


        Miss Miller’s vision again—The paradoxical striving of the
        libido away from the mother toward the mother—The destroying
        mother becomes beneficent on being conquered—Chiwantopel a
        hero of words, not deeds—He has not that will to live which
        breaks the magic circle of the incestuous—His identification
        with the author, and her wish for the parents—The end is the
        devouring of the daughter’s libido by the mother—Sexuality
        of the unconscious merely a symbol—Idle dreaming the mother
        of the fear of death—This downward path in the poetry of
        Hölderlin—The estrangement from reality, the introversion
        leading to death—The necessity of freeing libido for a
        complete devotion to life—Otherwise bound by unconscious
        compulsion: Fate—Sublimation through voluntary work—Creation
        of the world through cosmic sacrifice—Man discovers the
        world when he sacrifices the mother—The incest barrier as
        the producer of thought—Budding sexuality drawing the
        individual from the family—The mind dawns at the moment the
        child begins to be free of the mother—He seeks to win the
        world, and leave the mother—Childish regression to the
        presexual brings archaic phantasies—The incest problem not
        physical, but psychological—Sacrifice of the horse:
        sacrifice of the animal nature—The sacrifice of the “mother
        libido”: of the son to the mother—Superiority of Christian
        symbol: the sacrifice, not only of lower nature, but the
        whole personality—Miss Miller’s phantasy passes from
        sacrifice of the sexual, to sacrifice of the infantile
        personality—Problem of psychoanalysis, expressed
        mythologically, the sacrifice and rebirth of the infantile
        hero—The libido wills the destruction of its creation: horse
        and serpent—The end of the hero by means of earthquake—The
        one who understands him is the mother.




“_Therefore theory, which gives to facts their value and significance,
is often very useful, even if it is partially false, for it throws light
on phenomena which no one observed, it forces an examination, from many
angles, of facts which no one had hitherto studied, and it gives the
impulse for more extended and more productive researches._

“_It is, therefore, a moral duty for the man of science to expose
himself to the risk of committing error and to submit to criticism, in
order that science may continue to progress. A writer has attacked the
author for this very severely, saying, here is a scientific ideal very
limited and very paltry. But those who are endowed with a mind
sufficiently serious and impersonal as not to believe that all that they
write is the expression of truth absolute and eternal, approve of this
theory which places the aims of science well above the miserable vanity
and paltry ‘amour propre’ of the scientist._”—GUGLIELMO FERRERO.

         _Les Lois Psychologiques du Symbolisme—1895. Preface, p. viii._

                                 PART I


                              INTRODUCTION
