Hygieia in Ptolemais:

  “An encoiled granite snake, with arched neck, was found. In the middle
  of the coil is seen a narrow slit, polished by usage, just large


  enough to allow a coin of four centimeters diameter at most to fall

  through. At the side are holes for handles to lift the heavy pieces,
  the under half of which is used as a cover.”—_Herzog_, _Ibid._, p.
  212.

The serpent, as protector of the hoard, now lies on the treasure house.


The fear of the maternal womb of death has become the guardian of the

treasure of life. That the snake in this connection is really a symbol
of death, that is to say, of the dead libido, results from the fact that
the souls of the dead, like the chthonic gods, appear as _serpents_, as
dwellers in the kingdom of the mother of death.[744] This development of


symbol allows us to recognize easily the transition of the originally


very primitive significance of the crevice in the earth as mother to the

meaning of treasure house, and can, therefore, support the etymology of
_Hort_, “hoard, treasure,” as suggested by Kluge, κεύθω, belonging to
κὲῦθος, means the innermost womb of the earth (Hades); κύσθος, that
Kluge adds, is of similar meaning, cavity or womb. Prellwitz does not
mention this connection. Fick,[745] however, compares New High German
_hort_, Gothic _huzd_, to Armenian _kust_, “abdomen”; Church Slavonian
_čista_, Vedic _kostha_ = abdomen, from the Indo-Germanic root
_koustho -s_ = viscera, lower abdomen, room, store-room. Prellwitz
compares κύσθος κύστις = urinary bladder, bag, purse; Sanskrit
_kustha-s_ = cavity of the loins; then κύτος = cavity, vault; κύτις =
little chest, from κυέω = I am pregnant. Here, from κύτος = cave, κύυαρ
= hole, κύαθος = cup, κύλα - depression under the eye, κῦμα = swelling,
wave, billow, κῦρος = power, force, κύριος = lord, Old Iranian _caur_,
_cur_ = hero; Sanskrit _çura -s_ = strong, hero. The fundamental
Indo-Germanic roots[746] are _kevo_ = to swell, to be strong. From that
the above-mentioned κυέω, κύαρ, κῦρος and Latin _cavus_ = hollow,
vaulted, cavity, hole; _cavea_ = cavity, enclosure, cage, scene and
assembly; _caulæ_ = cavity, opening, enclosure, stall[747]; _kuéyô_ =
swell; participle, _kueyonts_ = swelling; _en-kueyonts_ = pregnant,
ἐγηυέων = Latin _inciens_ = pregnant; compare Sanskrit _vi-çvá-yan_ =
swelling; _kûro -s_ (_kevaro -s_), strong, powerful hero.


The treasure which the hero fetches from the dark cavern is swelling

life; it is himself, the hero, new-born from the anxiety of pregnancy
and the birth throes. Thus the Hindoo fire-bringer is called Mâtariçvan,
meaning the one swelling in the mother. The _hero striving towards the
mother is the dragon, and when he separates from the mother he becomes
the conqueror of the dragon_.[748] This train of thought, which we have
already hinted at previously in Christ and Antichrist, may be traced
even into the details of Christian phantasy. There is a series of
mediæval pictures[749] in which the communion cup contains a dragon, a
snake or some sort of small animal.[750]

The cup is the receptacle, the maternal womb, of the god resurrected in
the wine; the cup is the cavern where the serpent dwells, the god who
sheds his skin, in the state of metamorphosis; for Christ is also the
serpent. These symbolisms are used in an obscure connection in I
Corinthians, verse 10: Paul writes of the Jews who “were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea” (also reborn) and “did all drink
the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ.” They drank from the mother
(the generative rock, birth from the rock) the milk of rejuvenation, the
mead of immortality, and this Rock was Christ, here identified with the
mother, because he is the symbolic representative of the mother libido.
When we drink from the cup, then we drink from the mother’s breast
immortality and everlasting salvation. Paul wrote of the Jews that they
ate and then rose up to dance and to indulge in fornication, and then
twenty-three thousand of them were swept off by the plague of serpents.
The remedy for the survivors, however, was the sight of a serpent
hanging on a pole. From it was derived the cure.

[Illustration: THE DRAGON IN THE GOBLET]

  “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
  blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
  the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread, and one body; for
  we are all partakers of one bread.”—_I Corinthians_ x: 16, 17.

Bread and wine are the body and the blood of Christ; the food of the
immortals who are brothers with Christ, ἀδελφοί, those who come from the
same womb. We who are reborn again from the mother are all heroes
together with Christ, and enjoy immortal food. As with the Jews, so too
with the Christians, there is imminent danger of unworthy partaking, for
this mystery, which is very closely related psychologically with the
subterranean Hierosgamos of Eleusis, involves a mysterious union of man
in a spiritual sense,[751] which was constantly misunderstood by the
profane and was retranslated into his language, where mystery is
equivalent to orgy and secrecy to vice.[752] A very interesting


blasphemer and sectarian of the beginning of the nineteenth century

named Unternährer has made the following comment on the last supper:

  “The communion of the devil is in this brothel. All they sacrifice
  here, they sacrifice to the devil and not to God. There they have the
  devil’s cup and the devil’s dish; _there they have sucked the head of
  the snake_,[753] there they have fed upon the iniquitous bread and
  drunken the wine of wickedness.”[754]

Unternährer is an adherent or a forerunner of the “theory of living
one’s own nature.” He dreams of himself as a sort of priapic divinity;
he says of himself:

  “Black-haired, very charming and handsome in countenance, and every


  one enjoys listening to thee on account of the amiable speeches which

  come from thy mouth; therefore the maids love thee.”

He preaches “the cult of nakedness.”

  “Ye fools and blind men, behold God has created man in his image, as
  male and female, and has blessed them and said, ‘Be fruitful and
  multiply and fill the earth, and make it subject to thee.’ Therefore,


  he has given the greatest honor to these poor members and has placed

  them naked in the garden,” etc.

  “Now are the fig leaves and the covering removed, because thou hast
  turned to the Lord, for the Lord is the Spirit, and where the spirit
  of the Lord is, there is freedom,[755] there the clearness of the Lord
  is mirrored with uncovered countenance. This is precious before God,
  and this is the glory of the Lord, and the adornment of our God, when
  you stand in the image and honor of your God, as God created you,
  naked and not ashamed.

  “Who can ever praise sufficiently in the sons and daughters of the
  living God those parts of the body which are destined to procreate?

  “In the lap of the daughters of Jerusalem is the gate of the Lord, and
  the Just will go into the temple there, to the altar.[756] And in the
  lap of the sons of the living God is the water-pipe of the upper part,
  which is a tube, like a rod, to measure the temple and altar. And
  under the water-tube the sacred stones are placed, as a sign and
  testimony of the Lord, who has taken to himself the seed of Abraham.

  “Out of the seeds in the chamber of the mother, God creates a man with
  his hands, as an image of himself. Then the mother house and the
  mother chamber is opened in the daughters of the Living God, and God
  himself brings forth a child through them. Thus God creates children
  from the stones, for the seed comes from the stones.”[757]


History teaches in manifold examples how the religious mysteries are


liable to change suddenly into sexual orgies because they have

originated from an overvaluation of the orgy. It is characteristic that
this priapic divinity[758] returns again to the old symbol of the snake,
which in the mystery enters into the faithful, fertilizing and
spiritualizing them, although it originally possessed a phallic
significance. In the mysteries of the Ophites, the festival was really
celebrated with serpents, in which the animals were even kissed.
(Compare the caressing of the snake of Demeter in the Eleusinian
mysteries.) In the sexual orgies of the modern Christian sects the
phallic kiss plays a very important rôle. Unternährer was an
uncultivated, crazy peasant, and it is unlikely that the Ophitic
religious ceremonies were known to him.


The phallic significance is expressed negatively or mysteriously through