        The cause of introversion—The forward and backward flow of
        the libido—The abnormal third—The conflict rooted in the
        incest problem—The “terrible mother”—Miss Miller’s
        introversion—An internal conflict—Its product of hypnagogic
        vision and poem—The uniformity of the unconscious in all
        men—The unconscious the object of a true psychology—The
        individual tendency with its production of the hero cult—The
        love for the hero or god a love for the unconscious—A
        turning back to the mother of humanity—Such regressions act
        favorably within limits—Miss Miller’s mention of the
        Sphinx—Theriomorphic representations of the libido—Their
        tendency to represent father and mother—The Sphinx
        represents the fear of the mother—Miss Miller’s mention of
        the Aztec—Analysis of this figure—The significance of the
        hand symbolically—The Aztec a substitute for the Sphinx—The
        name Chi-wan-to-pel—The connection of the anal region with
        veneration—Chiwantopel and Ahasver, the Wandering Jew—The
        parallel with Chidher—Heroes generating themselves through
        their own mothers—Analogy with the Sun—Setting and rising
        sun: Mithra and Helios, Christ and Peter, Dhulqarnein and
        Chidher—The fish symbol—The two Dadophores: the two
        thieves—The mortal and immortal parts of man—The Trinity
        taken from phallic symbolism—Comparison of libido with
        phallus—Analysis of libido symbolism always leads back to
        the mother incest—The hero myth the myth of our own
        suffering unconscious—Faust.


 V.—    SYMBOLISM OF THE MOTHER AND OF REBIRTH                         233

        The crowd as symbol of mystery—The city as symbol of the
        mother—The motive of continuous “union”—The typical journey
        of the sun-hero—Examples—A longing for rebirth through the
        mother—The compulsion to symbolize the mother as City, Sea,
        Source, etc.—The city as terrible mother and as holy
        mother—The relation of the water-motive to rebirth—Of the
        tree-motive—Tree of life a mother-image—The bisexual
        character of trees—Such symbols to be understood
        psychologically, not anatomically—The incestuous desire aims
        at becoming a child again, not at incest—It evades incest by
        creating myths of symbolic rebirth—The libido spiritualized
        through this use of symbols—To be born of the spirit—This


        compulsion toward symbolism brings a release of forces bound

        up in incest—This process in Christianity—Christianity with


        its repression of the manifest sexual the negative of the

        ancient sexual cult—The unconscious transformation of the


        incest wish into religious exercise does not meet the modern

        need—A conscious method necessary, involving moral
        autonomy—Replacing belief by understanding—The history of
        the symbolism of trees—The rise of the idea of the terrible
        mother a mask of the incest wish—The myth of Osiris—Related
        examples—The motive of “devouring”—The Cross of Christ: tree
        of death and tree of life—Lilith: the devouring mother—The
        Lamias—The conquering of the mother—Snake and dragon: the
        resistance against incest—The father represents the active
        repulse of the incest wish of the son—He frequently becomes
        the monster to be overcome by the hero—The Mithraic
        sacrificing of the incest wish an overcoming of the mother—A


        replacing of archaic overpowering by sacrifice of the

        wish—The crucified Christ an expression of this
        renunciation—Other cross sacrifices—Cross symbol possesses
        significance of “union”—Child in mother’s womb: or man and
        mother in union—Conception of the soul a derivative of
        mother imago—The power of incest prohibition created the
        self-conscious individual—It was the coercion to
        domestication—The further visions of Miss Miller.


 VI.—   THE BATTLE FOR DELIVERANCE FROM THE MOTHER                     307

        The appearance of the hero Chiwantopel on horseback—Hero and
        horse equivalent of humanity and its repressed libido—Horse
        a libido symbol, partly phallic, partly maternal, like the
        tree—It represents the libido repressed through the incest
        prohibition—The scene of Chiwantopel and the
        Indian—Recalling Cassius and Brutus: also delirium of
        Cyrano—Identification of Cassius with his mother—His
        infantile disposition—Miss Miller’s hero also infantile—Her
        visions arise from an infantile mother transference—Her hero
        to die from an arrow wound—The symbolism of the arrow—The
        onslaught of unconscious desires—The deadly arrows strike
        the hero from within—It means the state of introversion—A
        sinking back into the world of the child—The danger of this
        regression—It may mean annihilation or new life—Examples of
        introversion—The clash between the retrogressive tendency in


        the individual unconscious and the conscious forward

        striving—Willed introversion—The unfulfilled sacrifice in
        the Miller phantasy means an attempt to renounce the mother:
        the conquest of a new life through the death of the old—The
        hero Miss Miller herself.


 VII.—  THE DUAL MOTHER ROLE                                           341

        Chiwantopel’s monologue—His quest for the “one who
        understands”—A quest for the mother—Also for the
        life-companion—The sexual element in the wish—The battle for
        independence from the mother—Its peril—Miss Miller’s use of
        Longfellow’s Hiawatha—An analysis of Hiawatha—A typical hero
        of the libido—The miraculous birth—The hero’s birth symbolic
        because it is really a rebirth from the mother-spouse—The


        twofold mother which in Christian mythology becomes twofold

        birth—The hero his own procreator—Virgin conception a mask
        for incestuous impregnation—Hiawatha’s early life—The
        identification of mother-nature with the mother—The killing
        of a roebuck a conquering of the parents—He takes on their
        strength—He goes forth to slay the father in order to
        possess the mother—Minnehaha, the mother—Hiawatha’s
        introversion—Hiding in the lap of nature really a return to
        the mother’s womb—The regression to the presexual revives
        the importance of nutrition—The inner struggle with the
        mother, to overpower and impregnate her—This fight against
        the longing for the mother brings new strength—The Mondamin
        motive in other myths—The Savior-hero the fruit of the


        entrance of the libido into the personal maternal

        depths—This is to die, and be born again—Hiawatha’s struggle
        with the fish-monster—A new deliverance from the mother—And
        so again with Megissogwon, the Magician—The hero must again
        and again conquer the mother—Then follows his marriage with
        Minnehaha—Other incidents, his death: the sinking of the sun
        in the west—Miss Miller also reminded by Chiwantopel’s
        longing of Wagner’s Siegfried—Analysis of the Siegfried
        myth—The treasure-guarding dragon—The dragon the son’s
        repressed longing for the mother—Symbolism of the cave—The
        separation from the mother, the hero’s conquering of the
        dragon—The symbolism of the cup—Drinking from the mother—Cup
        of the blood of Christ—The resultant mysterious union of
        man—Profane interpretations of this mystery—The phallic
        significance of the serpent—The snake as representing the
        introverting libido—Self-procreation: or creation of the
        world through introversion—The world thus an emanation of
        the libido—The hero himself a serpent—The psychoanalytic
        treatment of regression—The hidden libido touched upon
        causes a struggle: that is, the hero fights the fight with
        the treasure-guarding dragon—The awakening of
        Brunhilde—Siegfried finding his mother: a symbol of his own
        libido—The conquest of the terrible mother brings the love
        and life-giving mother.


 VIII.— THE SACRIFICE                                                  428

        Miss Miller’s vision again—The paradoxical striving of the
        libido away from the mother toward the mother—The destroying
        mother becomes beneficent on being conquered—Chiwantopel a
        hero of words, not deeds—He has not that will to live which
        breaks the magic circle of the incestuous—His identification
        with the author, and her wish for the parents—The end is the
        devouring of the daughter’s libido by the mother—Sexuality
        of the unconscious merely a symbol—Idle dreaming the mother
        of the fear of death—This downward path in the poetry of
        Hölderlin—The estrangement from reality, the introversion
        leading to death—The necessity of freeing libido for a
        complete devotion to life—Otherwise bound by unconscious
        compulsion: Fate—Sublimation through voluntary work—Creation
        of the world through cosmic sacrifice—Man discovers the
        world when he sacrifices the mother—The incest barrier as
        the producer of thought—Budding sexuality drawing the
        individual from the family—The mind dawns at the moment the
        child begins to be free of the mother—He seeks to win the
        world, and leave the mother—Childish regression to the
        presexual brings archaic phantasies—The incest problem not
        physical, but psychological—Sacrifice of the horse:
        sacrifice of the animal nature—The sacrifice of the “mother
        libido”: of the son to the mother—Superiority of Christian
        symbol: the sacrifice, not only of lower nature, but the
        whole personality—Miss Miller’s phantasy passes from
        sacrifice of the sexual, to sacrifice of the infantile
        personality—Problem of psychoanalysis, expressed
        mythologically, the sacrifice and rebirth of the infantile
        hero—The libido wills the destruction of its creation: horse
        and serpent—The end of the hero by means of earthquake—The
        one who understands him is the mother.


“_Therefore theory, which gives to facts their value and significance,
is often very useful, even if it is partially false, for it throws light
on phenomena which no one observed, it forces an examination, from many
angles, of facts which no one had hitherto studied, and it gives the
impulse for more extended and more productive researches._

“_It is, therefore, a moral duty for the man of science to expose
himself to the risk of committing error and to submit to criticism, in
order that science may continue to progress. A writer has attacked the
author for this very severely, saying, here is a scientific ideal very
limited and very paltry. But those who are endowed with a mind


sufficiently serious and impersonal as not to believe that all that they

write is the expression of truth absolute and eternal, approve of this


theory which places the aims of science well above the miserable vanity

and paltry ‘amour propre’ of the scientist._”—GUGLIELMO FERRERO.

         _Les Lois Psychologiques du Symbolisme—1895. Preface, p. viii._


                                 PART I


                              INTRODUCTION

Any one who can read Freud’s “Interpretation of the Dream” without


scientific rebellion at the newness and apparently unjustified daring of

its analytical presentation, and without moral indignation at the
astonishing nudity of the dream interpretation, and who can allow this


unusual array of facts to influence his mind calmly and without

prejudice, will surely be deeply impressed at that place where Freud
calls to mind the fact that an individual psychologic conflict, namely,
the Incest Phantasy, is the essential root of that powerful ancient
dramatic material, the Oedipus legend. The impression made by this


simple reference may be likened to that wholly peculiar feeling which

arises in us if, for example, in the noise and tumult of a modern street
we should come across an ancient relic—the Corinthian capital of a
walled-in column, or a fragment of inscription. Just a moment ago we
were given over to the noisy ephemeral life of the present, when
something very far away and strange appears to us, which turns our
attention to things of another order; a glimpse away from the incoherent
multiplicity of the present to a higher coherence in history. Very


likely it would suddenly occur to us that on this spot where we now run


busily to and fro a similar life and activity prevailed two thousand

years ago in somewhat other forms; similar passions moved mankind, and
man was likewise convinced of the uniqueness of his existence. I would


liken the impression which the first acquaintance with the monuments of

antiquity so easily leaves behind to that impression which Freud’s
reference to the Oedipus legend makes—for while we are still engaged


with the confusing impressions of the variability of the Individual

Soul, suddenly there is opened a revelation of the simple greatness of
the Oedipus tragedy—that never extinguished light of the Grecian
theatre.

This breadth of outlook carries in itself something of revelation. For
us, the ancient psychology has long since been buried among the shadows
of the past; in the schoolroom one could scarcely repress a sceptical