closely related roots _ben_ and _bel_ and the reduplication _benben_ and
_belbel_. The original significance of these roots is “to burst forth,
to emerge, to extrude, to well out,” with the associated idea of
bubbling, boiling and roundness. _Belbel_, accompanied by the sign of
the obelisk, of originally phallic nature, means source of light. The
obelisk itself had besides the names of _techenu_ and _men_ also the
name _benben_, more rarely _berber_ and _belbel_.[324] The libido
symbolism makes clear this connection, it seems to me.

The Indo-Germanic root _vel_, with the meaning “to wave, to undulate”
(fire), is found in Sanskrit _ulunka_ = burning, Greek ἀλέα, Attic ἁλέα
= warmth of the sun, Gothic _vulan_ = to undulate, Old High German and
Middle High German _walm_ = heat, glow.

The related Indo-Germanic root _vélkô_, with the meaning of “to lighten,
to glow,” is found in Sanskrit _ulkă_ = firebrand, Greek Ϝελχᾶνος =
Vulcan. This same root _vel_ means also “to sound”; in Sanskrit _vâní_ =
tone, song, music. Tschech _volati_ = to call.

The root _svénô_ = to sound, to ring, is found in Sanskrit _svan_,
_svánati_ = to rustle, to sound; Zend _qanañt_, Latin _sonâre_, Old
Iranian _senm_, Cambrian _sain_, Latin _sonus_, Anglo-Saxon _svinsian_ =
to resound. The related root _svénos_ = noise, sound, is found in Vedic
_svánas_ = noise, Latin _sonor_, _sonorus_. A further related root is
_svonós_ = tone, noise; in Old Iranian _son_ = word.

The root _své_ (n), locative _svéni_, dative _sunéi_, means sun; in Zend
_qeñg_ = sun. (Compare above _svénô_, Zend _qanañt_); Gothic _sun-na_,
_sunnô_.[325] Here Goethe has preceded us:

               “The sun orb sings in emulation,
               ’Mid brother-spheres, his ancient round:
               His path predestined through Creation,
               He ends with step of thunder sound.”
                                       —_Faust._ Part I.

              “Hearken! Hark! the hours careering!
              Sounding loud to spirit-hearing,
              See the new-born Day appearing!
              Rocky portals jarring shatter,
              Phœbus’ wheels in rolling clatter,
              With a crash the Light draws near!
              Pealing rays and trumpet-blazes,
              Eye is blinded, ear amazes;
              The Unheard can no one hear!
              Slip within each blossom-bell,
              Deeper, deeper, there to dwell,—
              In the rocks, beneath the leaf!
              If it strikes you, you are deaf.”
                                        —_Faust._ Part II.

We also must not forget the beautiful verse of Hölderlin:

             “Where art thou? Drunken, my soul dreams
             Of all thy rapture. Yet even now I hearken


             As full of golden tones the radiant sun youth


             Upon his heavenly lyre plays his even song

             To the echoing woods and hills.”

Just as in archaic speech fire and the speech sounds (the mating call,
music) appear as forms of emanation of the libido, thus light and sound
entering the psyche become one: libido.

Manilius expresses it in his beautiful verses:

                 “Quid mirum noscere mundum
   Si possunt homines, quibus est et mundus in ipsis
   Exemplumque dei quisque est in imagine parva?
   An quoquam genitos nisi cælo credere fas est
   Esse homines?


                 Stetit unus in arcem

   Erectus capitis victorque ad sidera mittit sidereos oculos.”[326]

The idea of the Sanskrit _têjas_ suggests the fundamental significance
of the libido for the conception of the world in general. I am indebted
to Dr. Abegg, in Zurich, a thorough Sanskrit scholar, for the
compilation of the eight meanings of this word.

_Têjas_ signifies:

  1. Sharpness, cutting edge.

  2. Fire, splendor, light, glow, heat.

  3. Healthy appearance, beauty.

  4. The fiery and color-producing power of the human organism (thought
  to be in the bile).

  5. Power, energy, vital force.

  6. Passionate nature.

  7. Mental, also magic, strength; influence, position, dignity.

  8. Sperma.

This gives us a dim idea of how, for primitive thought, the so-called
objective world was, and had to be, a subjective image. To this thought
must be applied the words of the “Chorus Mysticus”:

                        “All that is perishable
                        Is only an allegory.”

The Sanskrit word for fire is _agnis_ (the Latin _ignis_);[327] the fire
personified is the god Agni, the divine mediator,[328] whose symbol has
certain points of contact with that of Christ. In Avesta and in the
Vedas the fire is the messenger of the gods. In the Christian mythology
certain parts are closely related with the myth of Agni. Daniel speaks
of the three men in the fiery furnace:

  “Then Nebuchadnezar, the King, was astonished, and rose up in haste
  and spake, and said unto his counsellors: ‘Did not we cast three men
  bound into the midst of the fire?’

  “They answered and said: ‘True, O King!’

  “He answered and said: ‘Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst
  of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like
  the Son of God.’”

In regard to that the “Biblia pauperum” observes (according to an old
German incunabulum of 1471):

  “One reads in the third chapter of the prophet Daniel that
  Nebuchadnezar, the King, caused three men to be placed in a glowing
  furnace and that the king often went there, looked in, and that he saw
  with the three, a fourth, who was like the Son of God. The three
  signify for us, the Holy Trinity and the fourth, the unity of the
  being. Christ, too, in His explanation designated the person of the
  Trinity and the unity of the being.”

According to this mystic interpretation, the legend of the three men in


the fiery furnace appears as a magic fire ceremony by means of which the

Son of God reveals himself. The Trinity is brought together with the
unity, or, in other words, through coitus a child is produced. The
glowing furnace (like the glowing tripod in “Faust”) is a mother symbol,
where the children are produced.[329] The fourth in the fiery furnace
appears as Christ, the Son of God, who has become a visible God in the
fire. The mystic trinity and unity are sexual symbols. (Compare with
that the many references in Inman: “Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian
Symbolism.”) It is said of the Saviour of Israel (the Messiah) and of
his enemies, _Isaiah_ x:17:

  “And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a
  flame.”

In a hymn of the Syrian Ephrem it is said of Christ: “Thou who art all
fire, have mercy upon me.”

Agni is the sacrificial flame, the sacrificer, and the sacrificed, as
Christ himself. Just as Christ left behind his redeeming blood, φάρμακον
ἀθανασίας,[330] in the stimulating wine, so Agni is the Soma, the holy
drink of inspiration, the mead of immortality.[331] Soma and Fire are
entirely identical in Hindoo literature, so that in Soma we easily
rediscover the libido symbol, through which a series of apparently
paradoxical qualities of the Soma are immediately explained. As the old
Hindoos recognized in fire an emanation of the inner libido fire, so too
they recognized, in the intoxicating drink (Firewater, Soma-Agni, as
rain and fire), an emanation of libido. The Vedic definition of Soma as
seminal fluid confirms this interpretation.[332] The Soma significance
of fire, similar to the significance of the body of Christ in the Last
Supper (compare the Passover lamb of the Jews, baked in the form of a
cross), is explained by the psychology of the presexual stage, where the
libido was still in part the function of nutrition. The “Soma” is the
“nourishing drink,” the mythological characterization of which runs
parallel to fire in its origin; therefore, both are united in Agni. The
drink of immortality was stirred by the Hindoo gods like fire. Through


the retreat of the libido into the presexual stage it becomes clear why

so many gods were either defined sexually or were devoured.

As was shown by our discussion of fire preparation, the fire tool did
not receive its sexual significance as a later addition, but the sexual
libido was the motor power which led to its discovery, so that the later


teachings of the priests were nothing but confirmations of its actual

origin. Other primitive discoveries probably have acquired their sexual
symbolism in the same manner, being also derived from the sexual libido.

In the previous statements, which were based on the Pramantha of the
Agni sacrifice, we have concerned ourselves only with one significance
of the word manthâmi or mathnâmi, that is to say, with that which
expresses the movement of rubbing. As Kuhn shows, however, this word
also possesses the meaning of tearing off, taking away by violence,
robbing.[333] As Kuhn points out, this significance is already extant in
the Vedic text. The legend of its discovery always expresses the
production of fire as a robbery. (In this far it belongs to the motive
widely spread over the earth of the treasure difficult to attain.) The


fact that in many places and not alone in India the preparation of fire

is represented as having its origin in robbery, seems to point to a
widely spread thought, according to which the preparation of fire was
something forbidden, something usurped or criminal, which could be
obtained only through stratagem or deeds of violence (mostly through
stratagem).[334] When onanism confronts the physician as a symptom it
does so frequently under the symbol of secret pilfering, or crafty
imposition, which always signifies the concealed fulfilment of a
forbidden wish.[335] Historically, this train of thought probably


implies that the ritual preparation of fire was employed with a magic

purpose, and, therefore, was pursued by official religions; then it
became a ritual mystery,[336] guarded by the priests and surrounded with
secrecy. The ritual laws of the Hindoos threaten with severe punishment
him who prepares fire in an incorrect manner. The fact alone that
something is mysterious means the same as something done in concealment;
that which must remain secret, which one may not see nor do; also
something which is surrounded by severe punishment of body and soul;
therefore, presumably, _something forbidden_ which has received a
license as a religious rite. After all has been said about the genesis
of the preparation of fire, it is no longer difficult to guess what is
the forbidden thing; _it is onanism_. When I stated before that it might


be lack of satisfaction which breaks up the autoerotic ring of the

displaced sexual activity transferred to the body itself, and thus opens
wider fields of culture, I did not mention that this loosely closed ring
of the displaced onanistic activity could be much more firmly closed,
when man makes the other great discovery, that of true onanism.[337]
With that the activity is started in the proper place, and this, under
certain circumstances, may mean a satisfaction sufficient for a long
time, but at the expense of cheating sexuality of its real purpose. It
is a fraud upon the natural development of things, because all the


dynamic forces which can and should serve the development of culture are