  (1) “Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
  free.”

The Christians are the children of the City Above, a symbol of the
mother, not sons of the earthly city-mother, who is to be cast out; for
those born after the flesh are opposed to those born after the spirit,
who are not born from the mother in the flesh, but from a symbol for the
mother. One must again think of the Indians at this point, who say the
first people proceeded from the sword-hilt and a shuttle. The religious
thought is bound up with the compulsion to call the mother no longer
mother, but City, Source, Sea, etc. This compulsion can be derived from
the need to manifest an amount of libido bound up with the mother, but
in such a way that the mother is represented by or concealed in a
symbol. The symbolism of the city we find well-developed in the
revelations of John, where two cities play a great part, one of which is
insulted and cursed by him, the other greatly desired. We read in
Revelation (xvii:1):

  (1) “Come hither: I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great
  whore that sitteth on many waters.

  (2) “With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication and
  the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
  fornication.

  (3) “So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I
  saw a woman sit on a scarlet colored beast, full of the names of
  blasphemy, and having seven heads and ten horns.

  (4) “And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colors, and
  decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden
  cup[432] in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
  fornication.

  (5) “And upon her forehead was a name written: _Mystery. Babylon the
  great. The Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth._

  (6) “And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of saints, and with
  the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her I wondered with
  a great admiration.”

Here follows an interpretation of the vision unintelligible to us, from
which we can only emphasize the point that the seven heads[433] of the
dragon means the seven hills upon which the woman sits. This is probably
a distinct allusion to Rome, the city whose temporal power oppressed the
world at the time of the Revelation. The waters upon which the woman
“the mother” sits are “peoples and throngs and nations and tongues.”
This also seems to refer to Rome, for she is the mother of peoples and
possessed all lands. Just as in common speech, for example, colonies are
called daughters, so the people subject to Rome are like members of a
family subject to the mother. In another version of the picture, the
kings of the people, namely, the fathers, commit fornication with this
mother. Revelation continues (xviii: 2):

  (2) “And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
  Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils,
  and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
  hateful bird.

  (3) “For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
  fornication.”

Thus this mother does not only become the mother of all abominations,
but also in truth the receptacle of all that is wicked and unclean. The
birds are images of souls;[434] therefore, this means all souls of the
condemned and evil spirits. Thus the mother becomes Hecate, the
underworld, the City of the damned itself. We recognize easily in the
ancient idea of the woman on the dragon,[435] the above-mentioned
representation of Echnida, the mother of the infernal horrors. Babylon
is the idea of the “terrible” mother, who seduces all people to whoredom
with devilish temptation, and makes them drunk with her wine. The
intoxicating drink stands in the closest relation to fornication, for it
is also a libido symbol, as we have already seen in the parallel of fire
and sun. After the fall and curse of Babylon, we find in Revelation
(xix:6–7) the hymn which leads from the under half to the upper half of
the mother, where now everything is possible which would be impossible
without the repression of incest:

  (6) “Alleluia, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.

  (7) “Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the
  marriage of the Lamb is come,[436] and his wife hath made herself
  ready.

  (8) “And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
  clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

  (9) “And he saith unto me, ‘Write, Blessed are they which are called
  unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.’”

The Lamb is the son of man who celebrates his marriage with the “woman.”
Who the “woman” is remains obscure at first. But Revelation (xxi:9)
shows us which “woman” is the bride, the Lamb’s wife:

  (9) “Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.[437]

  (10) “And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high
  mountain, and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
  descending out of heaven from God, having the glory of God.”

It is evident from this quotation, after all that goes before, that the
City, the heavenly bride, who is here promised to the Son, is the
mother.[438] In Babylon the impure maid was cast out, according to the
Epistle to the Galatians, so that here in heavenly Jerusalem the
mother-bride may be attained the more surely. It bears witness to the
most delicate psychologic perception that the fathers of the church who
formulated the canons preserved this bit of the symbolic significance of
the Christ mystery. It is a treasure house for the phantasies and myth
materials which underlie primitive Christianity.[439] The further
attributes which were heaped upon the heavenly Jerusalem make its
significance as mother overwhelmingly clear:

  (1) “And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal,
  proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.

  (2) “In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the
  river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits,
  and yielded her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree were for
  the healing of nations.

  (3) “And there shall be no more curse.”

In this quotation we come upon the symbol of the waters, which we found
in the mention of Ogyges in connection with the city. The maternal
significance of water belongs to the clearest symbolism in the realm of
mythology,[440] so that the ancients could say: ἠ θάλασσα—τῆς γενέσεως
σύμβολον.[441] From water comes life;[442] therefore, of the two gods
which here interest us the most, Christ and Mithra, the latter was born
beside a river, according to representations, while Christ experienced
his new birth in the Jordan; moreover, he is born from the Πηγή,[443]
the “sempiterni fons amoris,” the mother of God, who by the
heathen-Christian legend was made a nymph of the Spring. The “Spring” is
also found in Mithracism. A Pannonian dedication reads, “Fonti perenni.”
An inscription in Apulia is dedicated to the “Fons Aeterni.” In Persia,
Ardvîçûra is the well of the water of life. Ardvîçûra-Anahita is a
goddess of water and love (just as Aphrodite is born from foam). The
neo-Persians designate the Planet Venus and a nubile girl by the name
“Nahid.” In the temples of Anaitis there existed prostitute Hierodules
(harlots). In the Sakaeen (in honor of Anaitis) there, occurred ritual
combats as in the festival of the Egyptian Ares and his mother. In the
Vedas the waters are called Mâtritamâh—the most maternal.[443] All that
is living rises as does the sun, from the water, and at evening plunges
into the water. Born from the springs, the rivers, the seas, at death
man arrives at the waters of the Styx in order to enter upon the “night
journey on the sea.” The wish is that the black water of death might be
the water of life; that death, with its cold embrace, might be the
mother’s womb, just as the sea devours the sun, but brings it forth
again out of the maternal womb (Jonah motive[444]). Life believes not in
death.

            “In the flood of life, in the torrent of deeds,
            I toss up and down,
            I am blown to and fro!
            Cradle and grave,
            An eternal sea;
            A changing web,
            A glowing life.”          —_Goethe: Faust._

That ξύλον ζωῆς, the wood of life, or the tree of life, is a maternal
symbol would seem to follow from the previous deductions. The etymologic
connection of ὕο, ὕλε, υἱός, in the Indo-Germanic root suggests the
blending of the meanings in the underlying symbolism of mother and of
generation. The tree of life is probably, first of all, a fruit-bearing
genealogical tree, that is, a mother-image. Countless myths prove the
derivation of man from trees; many myths show how the hero is enclosed
in the maternal tree—thus dead Osiris in the column, Adonis in the
myrtle, etc. Numerous female divinities were worshipped as trees, from
which resulted the cult of the holy groves and trees. It is of
transparent significance when Attis castrates himself under a pine tree,
i. e. he does it because of the mother. Goddesses were often worshipped
in the form of a tree or of a wood. Thus Juno of Thespiæ was a branch of
a tree, Juno of Samos was a board. Juno of Argos was a column. The
Carian Diana was an uncut piece of wood. Athene of Lindus was a polished
column. Tertullian calls Ceres of Pharos “rudis palus et informe lignum
sine effigie.” Athenaeus remarks of Latona at Dalos that she is ξὐλινον
ἄμορφον, a shapeless piece of wood.[445] Tertullian calls an Attic
Pallas “crucis stipes,” a wooden pale or mast. The wooden pale is
phallic, as the name suggests, φάλης, Pallus. The φαλλός is a pale, a
ceremonial lingam carved out of figwood, as are all Roman statues of
Priapus. Φάλος means a projection or centrepiece on the helmet, later
called κῶνος just as ἀναφαλ-αντίασις signifies baldheadedness on the
forepart of the head, and φαλακρός signifies baldheadedness in regard to
the φάλος-κῶνος of the helmet; a semi-phallic meaning is given to the
upper part of the head as well.[446] Φάλληνος has, besides φαλλός, the
significance of “wooden”; φαλ-άγγωμα, “cylinder”; φάλαγξ, “a round
beam.” The Macedonian battle array, distinguished by its powerful
impetus, is called φάλαγξ; moreover, the finger-joint[447] is called
φάλαγξ. φάλλαινα or φάλαινα is a whale. Now φαλός appears with the
meaning “shining, brilliant.” The Indo-Germanic root is _bhale_ = to
bulge, to swell.[448] Who does not think of Faust?

              “It grows, it shines, increases in my hand!”

That is primitive libido symbolism, which shows how immediate is the
connection between phallic libido and light. The same relations are
found in the Rigveda in Rudra’s utterances.

  _Rigveda_ 1, 114, 3:

  “May we obtain your favor, thou man ruling, Oh urinating Rudra.”

I refer here to the previously mentioned phallic symbolism of Rudra in
the Upanishads:

  (4) “We call for help below to the flaming Rudra, to the one bringing
  the sacrifice; him who encircles and wanders (wandering in the vault
  of Heaven) to the seer.”

  2, 33, 5:

  “He who opens up the sweet, who listens to our calls, the ruddy one,
  with the beautiful helmet, may he not give us over to the powers of
  jealousy.

  (6) “I have been rejoiced by the bull connected with Marut, the
  supplicating one with strong force of life.

  (8) “Sound the powerful song of praise to the ruddy bull to the white
  shining one; worship the flaming one with honor, we sing of the
  shining being Rudra.

  “May Rudra’s missile (arrow) not be used on us, may the great
  displeasure of the shining one pass us by: Unbend the firm (bow or
  hard arrow?) for the princes, thou who blessest with the waters of thy
  body (generative strength), be gracious to our children and
  grandchildren.”[449]

In this way we pass from the realm of mother symbolism imperceptibly
into the realm of male phallic symbolism. This element also lies in the
tree, even in the family tree, as is distinctly shown by the mediæval
family trees. From the first ancestor there grows upward, in the place
of the “membrum virile,” the trunk of the great tree. The bisexual
symbolic character of the tree is intimated by the fact that in Latin
trees have a masculine termination and a feminine gender.[450] The
feminine (especially the maternal) meaning of the forest and the phallic
significance of trees in dreams is well known. I mention an example.

It concerns a woman who had always been nervous, and who, after many
years of marriage, became ill as a result of the typical retention of
the libido. She had the following dream after she had learned to know a
young man of many engaging free opinions who was very pleasing to her:
She found herself in a garden where stood a remarkable exotic tree with
strange red fleshy flowers or fruits. She picked them and ate them.
Then, to her horror, she felt that she was poisoned. This dream idea may
easily be understood by means of the antique or poetic symbolism, so I
can spare information as to the analytic material.

The double significance of the tree is readily explained by the fact
that such symbols are not to be understood “anatomically” but
psychologically as libido symbols; therefore, it is not permissible to
interpret the tree on account of its similar form as directly phallic;
it can also be called a woman or the uterus of the mother. The
uniformity of the significance lies alone in the similarity to the
libido.[451] One loses one’s way in one “cul de sac” after another by
saying that this is the symbol substituted for the mother and that for
the penis. In this realm there is no fixed significance of things. The
only reality here is the libido, for which “all that is perishable is
merely a symbol.” It is not the physical actual mother, but the libido
of the son, the object of which was once the mother. We take mythologic
symbols much too concretely and wonder at every step about the endless
contradictions. These contradictions arise only because we constantly
forget that in the realm of phantasy “feeling is all.” Whenever we read,
therefore, “his mother was a wicked sorcerer,” the translation is as
follows: The son is in love with her, namely, he is unable to detach his
libido from the mother-imago; he therefore suffers from incestuous
resistance.

The symbolism of water and trees, which are met with as further
attributes in the symbol of the City, also refer to that amount of
libido which unconsciously is fastened to the mother-imago. In certain
parts of Revelation the unconscious psychology of religious longing is
revealed, namely, the longing for the _mother_.[452] The expectation of
Revelation ends in the mother: καὶ πᾶν κατάθεμα οὐκ ἔσται ἔτι (“and
there shall be no more curse”). There shall be no more sins, no
repression, no disharmony with one’s self, no guilt, no fear of death
and no pain of separation more!

Thus Revelation echoes that same radiant mystical harmony which was
caught again 2,000 years later and expressed poetically in the last
prayer of Dr. Marianus:

            “Penitents, look up, elate,
            Where she beams salvation;
            Gratefully to blessed fate
            Grow, in recreation!
            Be our souls, as they have been,
            Dedicate to thee!
            Virgin Holy, Mother, Queen,
            Goddess, gracious be!”        —_Goethe: Faust._

One principal question arises at the sight of this beauty and greatness
of feeling, that is, whether the primary tendency compensated by
religion is not too narrowly understood as incestuous. I have previously
observed in regard to this that I consider the “resistance opposed to
libido” as in a general way coincident with the incest prohibition. I
must leave open for the present the definition of the psychological
incest conception. However, I will here emphasize the point that it is
most especially the totality of the sun myth which proves to us that the
fundamental basis of the “incestuous” desire does not aim at
cohabitation, but at the special thought of becoming a child again, of
turning back to the parent’s protection, of coming into the mother once
more in order to be born again. But incest stands in the path to this
goal, that is to say, the necessity of in some way again gaining
entrance into the mother’s womb. One of the simplest ways would be to
impregnate the mother, and to reproduce one’s self identically. But here
the incest prohibition interferes; therefore, the myths of the sun or of
rebirth teem with all possible proposals as to how incest can be evaded.
A very simple method of avoidance is to transform the mother into
another being or to rejuvenate[453] her after birth has occurred, to
have her disappear again or have her change back. It is not incestuous
cohabitation which is desired, but the rebirth, which now is attained
most readily through cohabitation. But this is not the only way,
although perhaps the original one. The resistance to the incest
prohibition makes the phantasy inventive; for example, it was attempted
to impregnate the mother by means of a magic charm of fertility (to wish
for a child). Attempts in this respect remain in the stage of mythical
phantasies; but they have one result, and that is the exercise of the
phantasy which gradually produces paths through the creation of
phantastic possibilities, in which the libido, taking an active part,
can flow off. Thus the libido becomes _spiritualized in an imperceptible
manner_. The power “which always wishes evil” thus creates a spiritual
life. Therefore, in religions, this course is now raised to a system. On
that account it is exceedingly instructive to see how religion takes
pains to further these symbolic transferences.[454] The New Testament
furnishes us with an excellent example in regard to this. Nicodemus, in
the speech regarding rebirth, cannot forbear understanding the matter
very realistically.

  _John_ iii:4:

  (4) “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time
  into his mother’s womb, and be born?”

But Jesus endeavors to raise into purity the sensuous view of
Nicodemus’s mind moulded in materialistic heaviness, and announces to
him—really the same—and yet not the same:

  (5) “Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
  and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

  (6) “That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born
  of the spirit is spirit.

  (7) “Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.

  (8) “The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
  thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth; so
  is everyone that is born of the spirit.”

To be born of water means simply to be born from the mother’s womb. To
be born of the spirit means to be born from the fructifying breath of
the wind; this we learn from the Greek text (where spirit and wind are
expressed by the same word, πνεῦμα) τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τῆς σαρκος σάρξ
ἐστιν, καὶ τὸ γεγεννημένον ἐκ τοῦ πνεύματος πνεῦμά ἐστιν.—Τὸ πνεῦμα ὅπου
θέλει πνεῖ,[455] etc.

This symbolism rose from the same need as that which produced the
Egyptian legend of the vultures, the mother symbol. They were only
females and were fertilized by the wind. One recognizes very clearly the
ethical demand as the foundation of these mythologic assertions: _thou
must say of the mother that she was not impregnated by a mortal in the
ordinary way, but by a spiritual being in an unusual manner_. This
demand stands in strict opposition to the real truth; therefore, the
myth is a fitting solution. One can say it was a hero who died and was
born again in a remarkable manner, and in this way attained immortality.
The need which this demand asserts is evidently a prohibition against a
definite phantasy concerning the mother. A son may naturally think that
a father has generated him in a carnal way, but not that he himself
impregnated the mother and so caused himself to be born again into
renewed youth. This incestuous phantasy which for some reason possesses
an extraordinary strength,[456] and, therefore, appears as a compulsory
wish, is repressed and, conforming to the above demand, under certain
conditions, expresses itself again, symbolically, concerning the problem
of birth, or rather concerning individual rebirth from the mother. In
Jesus’s challenge to Nicodemus we clearly recognize this tendency:
“Think not carnally or thou art carnal, but think symbolically, then art
thou spirit.” It is evident how extremely educative and developing this
compulsion toward symbolism can be. Nicodemus would remain fixed in low
commonplaces if he did not succeed in raising himself through symbols
above this repressed incestuous desire. As a righteous philistine of
culture, he probably was not very anxious for this effort, because men
seem really to remain satisfied in repressing the incestuous libido, and
at best to express it by some modest religious exercises. Yet it seems
to be important, on the other side, that man should not merely renounce
and repress and thereby remain firmly fixed in the incestuous bond, but
that he should redeem those dynamic forces which lie bound up in incest,
in order to fulfil himself. For man needs his whole libido, to fill out
the boundaries of his personality, and then, for the first time, he is
in a condition to do his best. The paths by which man may manifest his
incestuously fixed libido seem to have been pointed out by the religious
mythologic symbols. On this account Jesus teaches Nicodemus: “Thou
thinkest of thy incestuous wish for rebirth, but thou must think that
thou art born from the water and that thou art generated by the breath
of the wind,[457] and in this way thou shalt share in eternal life.”

Thus the libido which lies inactive in the incestuous bond repressed and
in fear of the law and the avenging Father God can be led over into
sublimation through the symbol of baptism (birth from water) and of
generation (spiritual birth) through the symbol of the descent of the
Holy Ghost. Thus man becomes a child[458] again and is born into a
circle of brothers and sisters; but his mother is the “communion of the
saints,” the church, and his circle of brothers and sisters is humanity,
with whom he is united anew in the common inheritance of the primitive
symbol.

It seems that at the time in which Christianity had its origin this
process was especially necessary; for that period, as the result of the
incredible contrast between slavery and the freedom of the citizens and
masters, had entirely lost the consciousness of the common bond of
mankind. One of the next and most essential reasons for the energetic
regression to the infantile in Christianity, which goes hand in hand
with the revival of the incest problem, was probably to be found in the
far-reaching depreciation of women. At that time sexuality was so easily
attainable that the result could only be a very excessive depreciation
of the sexual object. The existence of personal values was first
discovered by Christianity, and there are many people who have not
discovered it even in the present day. However, the depreciation of the
sexual object hinders the outflow of that libido which cannot be
satisfied by sexual activity, because it belongs to an already
desexualized higher order. (If it were not so, a Don Juan could never be
neurotic; but the contrary is the case.) For how might those higher
valuations be given to a worthless, despised object? Therefore, the
libido, after having seen a “Helen in every woman” for so long a time,
sets out on a search for the difficult to obtain, the worshipped, but
perhaps unattainable, goal, and which in the unconscious is the mother.
Therefore the symbolic needs, based on the incest resistance, arise
again in an increased degree, which promptly transforms the beautiful,
sinful world of the Olympian Gods into incomprehensible, dreamlike, dark
mysteries, which, with their accessions of symbols and obscure
meaningful texts, remove us very far from the religious feelings of that
Roman-Græco world. When we see how much trouble Jesus took to make
acceptable to Nicodemus the symbolic perception of things, that is to
say, really a repression and veiling over of the actual facts, and how
important it was for the history of civilization in general, that people
thought and still think in this way, then we understand the revolt which
is raised everywhere against the psychologic discovery of the true
background of the neurotic or normal symbolism. Always and everywhere we
encounter the odious realm of sexuality, which represents to all
righteous people of to-day something defiled. However, less than 2,000
years have passed since the religious cult of sexuality was more or less
openly in full bloom. To be sure, they were heathen and did not know
better, but the nature of religious power does not change from cycle to
cycle. If one has once received an effectual impression of the sexual
contents of the ancient cults, and if one realizes oneself that the
religious experience, that is, the union[459] with the God of antiquity,
was understood by antiquity as a more or less concrete coitus, then
truly one can no longer fancy that the motor forces of a religion have
suddenly become wholly different since the birth of Christ. Exactly the
same thing has occurred as with the hysteric who at first indulges in
some quite unbeautiful, infantile sexual manifestations and afterwards
develops a hyperæsthetic negation in order to convince every one of his
special purity. _Christianity, with its repression of the manifest
sexual, is the negative of the ancient sexual cult._ The original cult
has changed its tokens.[460] One only needs to realize how much of the
gay paganism, even to the inclusion of unseemly Gods, has been taken
into the Christian church. Thus the old indecent Priapus celebrated a
gay festival of resurrection in St. Tychon.[461] Also partly in the
physicians Sts. Kosma and Damien, who graciously condescended to accept
the “membra virilia” in wax at their festival.[462] St. Phallus of old
memories emerges again to be worshipped in country chapels, to say
nothing of the rest of the paganism!

There are those who have not yet learned to recognize sexuality as a
function equivalent to hunger and who, therefore, consider it as
disgraceful that certain taboo institutions which were considered as
asexual refuges are now recognized as overflowing with sexual symbolism.
Those people are doomed to the painful realization that such is still
the case, in spite of their great revolt. One must learn to understand
that, opposed to the customary habit of thought, psychoanalytic thinking
reduces and resolves those symbolic structures which have become more
and more complicated through countless elaboration. This means a course
of reduction which would be an intellectual enjoyment if the object were
different. But here it becomes distressing, not only æsthetically, but
apparently also ethically, because the repressions which are to be
overcome have been brought about by our best intentions. We must
commence to overcome our virtuousness with the certain fear of falling
into baseness on the other side. This is certainly true, for
virtuousness is always inwardly compensated by a great tendency towards
baseness; and how many profligates are there who inwardly preserve a
mawkish virtue and moral megalomania? Both categories of men turn out to
be snobs when they come in contact with analytic psychology, because the
moral man has imagined an objective and cheap verdict on sexuality and
the unmoral man is entirely unaware of the vulgarity of his sexuality
and of his incapacity for an unselfish love. One completely forgets that
one can most miserably be carried away, not only by a vice, but also by
a virtue. There is a fanatic orgiastic self-righteousness which is just
as base and which entails just as much injustice and violence as a vice.

At this time, when a large part of mankind is beginning to discard
Christianity, it is worth while to understand clearly why it was
originally accepted. It was accepted in order to escape at last from the
brutality of antiquity. As soon as we discard it, licentiousness
returns, as impressively exemplified by life in our large modern cities.
This step is not a forward step, but a backward one. It is as with
individuals who have laid aside one form of transference and have no new
one. Without fail they will occupy regressively the old path of
transference, to their great detriment, because the world around them
has since then essentially changed. He who is repelled by the historical
and philosophical weakness of the Christian dogmatism and the religious
emptiness of an historical Jesus, of whose person we know nothing and
whose religious value is partly Talmudic, partly Hellenic wisdom, and
discards Christianity, and therewith Christian morality, is certainly
confronted with the ancient problem of licentiousness. To-day the
individual still feels himself restrained by the public hypocritical
opinion, and, therefore, prefers to lead a secret, separate life, but
publicly to represent morality. It might be different if men in general
all at once found the moral mask too dull, and if they realized how
dangerously their beasts lie in wait for each other, and then truly a
frenzy of demoralization might sweep over humanity. This is the dream,
the wish dream, of the morally limited man of to-day; he forgets
necessity, which strangles men and robs them of their breath, and which
with a stern hand interrupts every passion.

It must not be imputed to me that I am wishing to refer the libido back
by analytical reduction to the primitive, almost conquered, stages,
entirely forgetting the fearful misery this would entail for humanity.
Indeed, some individuals would let themselves be transported by the
old-time frenzy of sexuality, from which the burden of guilt has been
removed, to their own greatest detriment.

But these are the ones who under other circumstances would have
prematurely perished in some other way. However, I well know the most
effectual and most inexorable regulator of human sexuality. This is
necessity. With this leaden weight human lust will never fly too high.

To-day there are countless neurotics who are so simply because they do
not know how to seek happiness in their own manner. They do not even
realize where the lack lies. And besides these neurotics there are many
more normal people—and precisely people of the higher type—who feel
restricted and discontented. For all these reduction to the sexual
elements should be undertaken, in order that they may be reinstated into
the possession of their primitive self, and thereby learn to know and
value its relation to the entire personality. In this way alone can
certain requirements be fulfilled and others be repudiated as unfit
because of their infantile character. In this way the individual will
come to realize that certain things are to be sacrificed, although they
are accomplished, _but in another sphere_. We imagine that we have long
renounced, sacrificed and cut off our incest wish, and that nothing of
it is left. But it does not occur to us that this is not true, but that
we unconsciously commit incest in another territory. In religious
symbols, for example, we come across incest.[463] We consider the
incestuous wish vanished and lost, and then rediscover it in full force
in religion. This process or transformation has taken place
unconsciously in secular development. Just as in Part I it is shown that
a similar unconscious transformation of the libido is an ethically
worthless pose, and with which I compared the Christianity of early
Roman antiquity, where evidently licentiousness and brutality were
strongly resisted, so here I must remark in regard to the sublimation of
the incestuous libido, that the belief in the religious symbol has
ceased to be an ethical ideal; but it is an unconscious transformation
of the incest wish into symbolic acts and symbolic concepts which cheat
men, as it were, so that heaven appears to them as a father and earth as
a mother and the people upon it children and brothers and sisters. Thus
man can remain a child for all time and satisfy his incest wish all
unawares. This state would doubtless be ideal[464] if it were not
infantile and, therefore, merely a one-sided wish, which maintains a
childish attitude. _The reverse is anxiety._ Much is said of pious
people who remain unshaken in their trust in God and wander unswervingly
safe and blessed through the world. I have never seen this Chidher yet.
It is probably a wish figure. The rule is great uncertainty among
believers, which they drown with fanatical cries among themselves or
among others; moreover, they have religious doubts, moral uncertainty,
doubts of their own personality, feelings of guilt and, deepest of all,
great fear of the opposite aspect of reality, against which the most
highly intelligent people struggle with all their force. This other side
is the devil, the adversary or, expressed in modern terms, the
corrective of reality, of the infantile world picture, which has been
made acceptable through the predominating pleasure principle.[465] But
the world is not a garden of God, of the Father, but a place of terrors.
Not only is heaven no father and earth no mother and the people not
brothers nor sisters, but they represent hostile, destroying powers, to
which we are abandoned the more surely, the more childishly and
thoughtlessly we have entrusted ourselves to the so-called Fatherly hand
of God. One should never forget the harsh speech of the first Napoleon,
that the good God is always on the side of the heaviest artillery.

The religious myth meets us here as one of the greatest and most
significant human institutions which, despite misleading symbols,
nevertheless gives man assurance and strength, so that he may not be
overwhelmed by the monsters of the universe. The symbol, considered from
the standpoint of actual truth, is misleading, indeed, but it is
_psychologically true_,[466] because it was and is the bridge to all the
greatest achievements of humanity.

But this does not mean to say that this unconscious way of
transformation of the incest wish into religious exercises is the only
one or the only possible one. There is also a conscious recognition and
understanding with which we can take possession of this libido which is
bound up in incest and transformed into religious exercises so that we
no longer need the stage of religious symbolism for this end. It is
thinkable that instead of doing good to our fellow-men, for “the love of
Christ,” we do it from the knowledge that humanity, even as ourselves,
could not exist if, among the herd, the one could not sacrifice himself
for the other. _This would be the course of moral autonomy, of perfect
freedom, when man could without compulsion wish that which he must do,
and this from knowledge, without delusion through belief in the
religious symbols._

It is a positive creed which keeps us infantile and, therefore,
ethically inferior. Although of the greatest significance from the
cultural point of view and of imperishable beauty from the æsthetic
standpoint, this delusion can no longer ethically suffice humanity
striving after moral autonomy.

The infantile and moral danger lies in belief in the symbol because
through that we guide the libido to an imaginary reality. The simple
negation of the symbol changes nothing, for the entire mental
disposition remains the same; we merely remove the dangerous object. But
the object is not dangerous; the danger is our own infantile mental
state, for love of which we have lost something very beautiful and
ingenious through the simple abandonment of the religious symbol. I
think _belief should be replaced by understanding_; then we would keep
the beauty of the symbol, but still remain free from the depressing
results of submission to belief. This would be the psychoanalytic cure
for belief and disbelief.


The vision following upon that of the city is that of a “strange fir
tree with gnarled branches.” This vision does not seem extraordinary to
us after all that we have learned of the tree of life and its
associations with the city and the waters of life. This especial tree
seems simply to continue the category of the mother symbols. The
attribute “strange” probably signifies, as in dreams, a special
emphasis, that is, a special underlying complex material. Unfortunately,
the author gives us no individual material for this. As the tree already
suggested in the symbolism of the city is particularly emphasized
through the further development of Miss Miller’s visions here, I find it
necessary to discuss at some length the history of the symbolism of the
tree.

It is well known that trees have played a large part in the cult myth
from the remotest times. The typical myth tree is the tree of paradise
or of life which we discover abundantly used in Babylonian and also in
Jewish lore; and in prechristian times, the pine tree of Attis, the tree
or trees of Mithra; in Germanic mythology, Ygdrasil and so on. The
hanging of the Attis image on the pine tree; the hanging of Marsyas,
which became a celebrated artistic motive; the hanging of Odin; the
Germanic hanging sacrifices—indeed, the whole series of hanged
gods—teaches us that the hanging of Christ on the cross is not a unique
occurrence in religious mythology, but belongs to the same circle of
ideas as others. In this world of imagery the cross of Christ is the
tree of life, and equally the wood of death. This contrast is not
astounding. Just as the origin of man from trees was a legendary idea,
so there were also burial customs, in which people were buried in hollow
trees. From that the German language retains even now the expression
“Totenbaum” (tree of death) for a coffin. Keeping in mind the fact that
the tree is predominantly a mother symbol, then the mystic significance
of this manner of burial can be in no way incomprehensible to us. _The
dead are delivered back to the mother for rebirth._ We encounter this
symbol in the Osiris myth, handed down by Plutarch,[467] which is, in
general, typical in various aspects. Rhea is pregnant with Osiris; at
the same time also with Isis; Osiris and Isis mate even in the mother’s
womb (motive of the night journey on the sea with incest). Their son is
Arueris, later called Horus. It is said of Isis that she was born “in
absolute humidity” (τετάρτῃ δὲ τῆν Ἴσιν ἐν πανύγροις γενέσθαι[468]). It
is said of Osiris that a certain Pamyles in Thebes heard a voice from
the temple of Zeus while drawing water, which commanded him to proclaim
that Osiris was born μέγας βασιλεὺς εὐεργέτης Ὄσιρις.[469] In honor of
this the Pamylion were celebrated. They were similar to the
phallophorion. Pamyles is a phallic demon, similar to the original
Dionysus. The myth reduced reads: Osiris and Isis were generated by
phallus from the water (mother womb) in the ordinary manner. (Kronos had
made Rhea pregnant, the relation was secret, and Rhea was his sister.
Helios, however, observed it and cursed the relation.) Osiris was killed
in a crafty manner by the god of the underworld, Typhon, who locked him
in a chest. He was thrown into the Nile, and so carried out to sea.
Osiris, however, mated in the underworld with his second sister,
Nephthys (motive of the night journey to the sea with incest). One sees
here how the symbolism is developed. In the mother womb, before the
outward existence, Osiris commits incest; in death, the second
intrauterine existence, Osiris again commits incest. Both times with a
sister who is simply substituted for the mother as a legal, uncensured
symbol, since the marriage with a sister in early antiquity was not
merely tolerated, but was really commended. Zarathustra also recommended
the marriage of kindred. This form of myth would be impossible to-day,
because cohabitation with the sister, being incestuous, would be
repressed. The wicked Typhon entices Osiris craftily into a box or
chest; this distortion of the true state of affairs is transparent. The
“original sin” caused men to wish to go back into the mother again, that
is, the incestuous desire for the mother, condemned by law, is the ruse
supposedly invented by Typhon. The fact is, the ruse is very
significant. Man tries to sneak into rebirth through subterfuge in order
to become a child again. An early Egyptian hymn[470] even raises an
accusation against the mother Isis because she destroys the sun-god Rê
by treachery. It was interpreted as the ill-will of the mother towards
her son that she banished and betrayed him. The hymn describes how Isis
fashioned a snake, put it in the path of Rê, and how the snake wounded
the sun-god with a poisonous bite, from which wound he never recovered,
so that finally he had to retire on the back of the heavenly cow. But
this cow is the cow-headed goddess, just as Osiris is the bull Apis. The
mother is accused as if she were the cause of man flying to the mother
in order to be cured of the wound which she had herself inflicted. This
wound is the prohibition of incest.[471] Man is thus cut off from the
hopeful certainty of childhood and early youth, from all the
unconscious, instinctive happenings which permit the child to live as an
appendage of his parents, unconscious of himself. There must be
contained in this many sensitive memories of the animal age, where there
was not any “thou shalt” and “thou shalt not,” but all was just simple
occurrence. Even yet a deep animosity seems to live in man because a
brutal law has separated him from the instinctive yielding to his
desires and from the great beauty of the harmony of the animal nature.
This separation manifested itself, among other things, in the incest
prohibition and its correlates (laws of marriage, etc.); therefore pain
and anger relate to the mother, as if she were responsible for the
domestication of the sons of men. In order not to become conscious of
his incest wish (his backward harking to the animal nature), the son
throws all the burden of the guilt on the mother, from which arises the
idea of the “terrible mother.”[472] The mother becomes for him a spectre
of anxiety, a nightmare.[473]

After the completed “night journey to the sea,” the chest of Osiris was
cast ashore by Byblos, and lay in the branches of an Erica, which grew
around the coffin and became a splendid tree. The king of the land had
the tree placed as a column under his roof.[474] During this period of
Osiris’s absence (the winter solstice) the lament customary during
thousands of years for the dead god and his return occurs, and its
εὕρεσις is a feast of joy. A passage from the mournful quest of Isis is
especially noteworthy:

  “She flutters like a swallow lamenting around the column, which
  encloses the god sleeping in death.”

(This same motive returns in the Kyffhäuser saga.)

[Illustration: FRUCTIFICATION FOLLOWING UPON THE MITHRAIC SACRIFICE]

Later on Typhon dismembers the corpse and scatters the pieces. We come
upon the _motive of dismemberment_ in countless sun myths,[475] namely,
the inversion of the idea of the composition of the child in the
mother’s womb.[476] In fact, the mother Isis collects the pieces of the
body with the help of the jackal-headed Anubis. (She finds the corpse
with the help of dogs.) Here the nocturnal devourers of bodies, the dogs
and jackals, become the assistants of the composition, of the
reproduction.[477] The Egyptian vulture owes its symbolic meaning as
mother to this necrophagic habit. In Persian antiquity the corpses were
thrown out for the dogs to devour, just as to-day in the Indian funeral
pyres the removal of the carcasses is left to the vultures. Persia was
familiar with the custom of leading a dog to the bed of one dying,
whereupon the latter had to present the dog with a morsel.[478] The
custom, on its surface, evidently signifies that the morsel is to belong
to the dog, so that he will spare the body of the dead, precisely as
Cerberus was soothed by the honey-cakes which Hercules gave to him in
the journey to hell. But when we bear in mind the jackal-headed Anubis
who rendered his good services in the gathering together of the
dismembered Osiris, and the mother significance of the vulture, then the
question arises whether something deeper was not meant by this ceremony.
Creuzer has also concerned himself with this idea, and has come to the
conclusion that the astral form of the dog ceremony, that is, the
appearance of Sirius, the dog star, at the period of the sun’s highest
position, is related to this in that the introduction of the dog has a
compensatory significance, death being thereby made, reversedly, equal
to the sun’s highest position. This is quite in conformity with
psychologic thought, which results from the very general fact that death
is interpreted as entrance into the mother’s womb (rebirth). This
interpretation would seem to be supported by the otherwise enigmatic
function of the dog in the Sacrificium Mithriacum. In the monuments a
dog always leaps up upon the bull killed by Mithra. However, this
sacrifice is probably to be interpreted through the Persian legend, as
well as through the monument, as the moment of the _highest fecundity_.
The most beautiful expression of this is seen upon the magnificent
Mithra relief of Heddernheim. Upon one side of a large stone slab
(formerly probably rotating) is seen the stereotyped overthrowing and
sacrifice of the bull, but upon the other side stands Sol, with a bunch
of grapes in his hand, Mithra with the cornucopia, the Dadophores with
fruits, corresponding to the legend that all fecundity proceeds from the
dead bull of the world, fruits from the horns, wine from its blood,
grain from the tail, cattle from its sperma, leek from its nose, and so
on. Silvanus stands above this scene with the animals of the forest
arising from him. The significance suspected by Creuzer might very
easily belong to the dog in this connection.[479] Let us now turn back
to the myth of Osiris. In spite of the restoration of the corpse
accomplished by Isis, the resuscitation succeeds only incompletely in so
far as the phallus of Osiris cannot again be produced, because it was
eaten by the fishes; the power of life was wanting.[480] Osiris as a
phantom once more impregnated Isis, but the fruit is Harpocrates, who
was feeble in τοῖς κάτωθεν γυίοις (in the lower limbs), that is,
corresponding to the significance of γυῖον (at the feet). (Here, as is
plainly evident, foot is used in the phallic meaning.) This incurability
of the setting sun corresponds to the incurability of Rê in the
above-mentioned older Egyptian sun hymn. Osiris, although only a
phantom, now prepares the young sun, his son Horus, for a battle with
Typhon, the evil spirit of darkness. Osiris and Horus correspond to the
father-son symbolism mentioned in the beginning, which symbolic figure,
corresponding again to the above formulation,[481] is flanked by the
well-formed and ugly figures of Horus and Harpocrates, the latter
appearing mostly as a cripple, often represented distorted to a mere
caricature.[482]

He is confused in the tradition very much with Horus, with whom he also
has the name in common. Hor-pi-chrud, as his real name[483] reads, is
composed from _chrud_, “child,” and _Hor_, from the adjective _hri_ =
up, on top, and signifies the up-coming child, as the rising sun, and
opposed to Osiris, who personifies the setting sun—the sun of the west.
Thus Osiris and Horpichrud or Horus are one being, both husband and son
of the same mother, Hathor-Isis. The Chnum-Ra, the sun god of lower
Egypt, represented as a ram, has at his side, as the female divinity of
the land, Hatmehit, who wears the fish on her head. She is the mother
and wife of Bi-neb-did (Ram, local name of Chnum-Ra). In the hymn of
Hibis,[484] Amon-ra was invoked:

  “Thy (Chum-Ram) dwells in Mendes, united as the quadruple god Thmuis.
  He is the phallus, the lord of the gods. The bull of his mother
  rejoices in the cow (ahet, the mother) and man fructifies through his
  semen.”

In further inscriptions Hatmehit was directly referred to as the “mother
of Mendes.” (Mendes is the Greek form of Bi-neb-did: ram.) She is also
invoked as the “Good,” with the additional significance of _ta-nofert_,
or “young woman.” The cow as symbol of the mother is found in all
possible forms and variations of Hathor-Isis, and also in the female Nun
(parallel to this is the primitive goddess Nit or Neith), the protoplasm
which, related to the Hindoo Atman,[485] is equally of masculine and
feminine nature. Nun is, therefore, invoked as Amon,[486] the original
water,[487] which is in the beginning. He is also designated as the
father of fathers, the mother of mothers. To this corresponds the
invocation to the female side of Nun-Amon, of Nit or Neith.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother of god, the mistress of Esne, the father
  of fathers, the mother of mothers, who is the beetle and the vulture,
  the being in its beginning.

  “Nit, the ancient, the mother who bore the light god, Râ, who bore
  first of all, when there was nothing which brought forth.

  “The cow, the ancient, which bore the sun, and then laid the germ of
  gods and men.”

The word “nun” has the significance of young, fresh, new, also the
on-coming waters of the Nile flood. In a transferred sense “nun” was
also used for the chaotic primitive waters; in general for the primitive
generating matter[488] which was personified by the goddess Nunet. From
her Nut sprang, the goddess of heaven, who was represented with a starry
body, and also as the heavenly cow with a starry body.

When the sun-god, little by little, retires on the back of the heavenly
cow, just as poor Lazarus returns into Abraham’s bosom, each has the
same significance; they return into the mother, in order to rise as
Horus. Thus it can be said that in the morning the goddess is the
mother, at noon the sister-wife and in the evening again the mother, who
receives the dying in her lap, reminding us of the Pietà of
Michelangelo. As shown by the illustration (from Dideron’s “Iconographie
Chrétienne”), this thought has been transferred as a whole into
Christianity.

Thus the fate of Osiris is explained: he passes into the mother’s womb,
the chest, the sea, the tree, the column of Astartes; he is dismembered,
re-formed, and reappears again in his son, Hor-pi-chrud.

Before entering upon the further mysteries which the beautiful myth
reveals to us, there is still much to be said about the symbol of the
tree. Osiris lies in the branches of the tree, surrounded by them, as in
the mother’s womb. The motive of _embracing and entwining_ is often
found in the sun myths, meaning that it is the _myth of rebirth_. A good
example is the Sleeping Beauty, also the legend of the girl who is
enclosed between the bark and the trunk, but who is freed by a youth
with his horn.[489] The horn is of gold and silver, which hints at the
sunbeam in the phallic meaning. (Compare the previous legend of the
horn.) An exotic legend tells of the sun-hero, how he must be freed from
the plant entwining around him.[490] A girl dreams of her lover who has
fallen into the water; she tries to save him, but first has to pull
seaweed and sea-grass from the water; then she catches him. In an
African myth the hero, after his act, must first be disentangled from
the seaweed. In a Polynesian myth the hero’s ship was encoiled by the
tentacles of a gigantic polyp. Rê’s ship is encoiled by a night serpent
on its night journey on the sea. In the poetic rendering of the history
of Buddha’s birth by Sir Edwin Arnold (“The Light of Asia,” p. 5) the
motive of an embrace is also found:

         “Queen Maya stood at noon, her days fulfilled,
         Under a Palso in the palace grounds,
         A stately trunk, straight as a temple shaft,
         With crown of glossy leaves and fragrant blooms;
         And knowing the time come—for all things knew—
         The conscious tree bent down its boughs to make
         A bower about Queen Maya’s majesty:
         And earth put forth a thousand sudden flowers
         To spread a couch: while ready for the bath
         The rock hard by gave out a limpid stream
         Of crystal flow. So brought she forth the child.”[491]

We come across a very similar motive in the cult legend of the Samian
Hera. Yearly it was claimed that the image disappeared from the temple,
was fastened somewhere on the seashore on a trunk of a Lygos tree and
wound about with its branches. There it was “found,” and was treated
with wedding-cake. This feast is undoubtedly a ἱερὸς γάμος (ritual
marriage), because in Samos there was a legend that Zeus had first had a
long-continued secret love relation with Hera. In Plataea and Argos, the
marriage procession was represented with bridesmaids, marriage feast,
and so on. The festival took place in the wedding month “Γαμηλιών”
(beginning of February). But in Plataea the image was previously carried
into a lonely place in the wood; approximately corresponding to the
legend of Plutarch that Zeus had kidnapped Hera and then had hidden her
in a cave of Cithaeron. According to our deductions, previously made, we
must conclude from this that there is still another train of thought,
namely, the magic charm of a rejuvenation, which is condensed in the
Hierosgamos. The disappearance and hiding in the wood, in the cave, on
the seashore, entwined in a willow tree, points to the death of the sun
and rebirth. The early springtime Γαμηλιών (the time of Marriage) in
February fits in with that very well. In fact, Pausanias informs us that
the Argivian Hera _became a maiden again by a yearly bath in the spring
of Canathos_. The significance of the bath is emphasized by the
information that in the Plataeian cult of Hera Teleia, Tritonian nymphs
appeared as water-carriers. In a tale from the Iliad, where the conjugal
couch of Zeus upon Mount Ida is described, it is said:[492]

         “The son of Saturn spake, and took his wife
         Into his arms, while underneath the pair,
         The sacred Earth threw up her freshest herbs:
         The dewy lotos, and the crocus-flower,
         And thick and soft the hyacinth. All these
         Upbore them from the ground. Upon this couch
         They lay, while o’er them a bright golden cloud
         Gathered and shed its drops of glistening dew.
         So slumbered on the heights of Gargarus
         The All-Father overcome by sleep and love,
         And held his consort in his arms.”
                                       —Trans. by W. C. Bryant.

Drexler recognizes in this description an unmistakable allusion to the
garden of the gods on the extreme western shore of the ocean, an idea
which might have been taken from a Prehomeric Hierosgamos hymn. This
western land is the land of the setting sun, whither Hercules,
Gilgamesh, etc., hasten with the sun, in order to find there
immortality, where the sun and the maternal sea unite in an eternally
rejuvenating intercourse. Our supposition of a condensation of the
Hierosgamos with the myth of rebirth is probably confirmed by this.
Pausanias mentions a related myth fragment where the statue of Artemis
Orthia is also called Lygodesma (chained with willows), because it was
found in a willow tree; this tale seems to be related to the general
Greek celebration of Hierosgamos with the above-mentioned customs.[493]

The motive of the “devouring” which Frobenius has shown to be a regular
constituent of the sun myths is closely related to this (also
metaphorically). The “whale dragon” (mother’s womb) always “devours” the
hero. The devouring may also be partial instead of complete.

A six-year-old girl, who goes to school unwillingly, dreams that her leg
is encircled by a large red worm. She had a tender interest for this
creature, contrary to what might be expected. An adult patient, who
cannot separate from an older friend on account of an extraordinarily
strong mother transference, dreams that “she had to get across some deep
water (typical idea!) with this friend; her friend fell in (mother
transference); she tries to drag her out, and almost succeeds, but a
large crab seizes on the dreamer by the foot and tries to pull her in.”

Etymology also confirms this conception: There is an Indo-Germanic root
_vélu-_, _vel-_, with the meaning of “encircling, surrounding, turning.”
From this is derived Sanskrit _val_, _valati_ = to cover, to surround,
to encircle, to encoil (symbol of the snake); _vallî_ = creeping plant;
_ulûta_ = boa-constrictor = Latin _volûtus_, Lithuanian _velù_, _velti_
= _wickeln_ (to roll up); Church Slavonian _vlina_ = Old High German,
_wella_ = _Welle_ (wave or billow). To the root _vélu_ also belongs the
root _vlvo_, with the meaning “cover, corium, womb.” (The serpent on
account of its casting its skin is an excellent symbol of rebirth.)
Sanskrit _ulva_, _ulba_ has the same meaning; Latin _volva_, _volvula_,
_vulva_. To _vélu_ also belongs the root _ulvorâ_, with the meaning of
“fruitful field, covering or husk of plants, sheath.” Sanskrit _urvárâ_
= sown field. Zend _urvara_ = plant. (See the personification of the
ploughed furrow.) The same root _vel_ has also the meaning of “wallen”
(to undulate). Sanskrit _ulmuka_ = conflagration. Ϝαλέα, Ϝέλα, Gothic
_vulan_ = _wallen_ (to undulate). Old High German and Middle High German
_walm_ = heat, glow.[494] It is typical that in the state of
“involution” the hair of the sun-hero always falls out from the heat.
Further the root _vel_ is found with the meaning “to sound,[495] and to
will, to wish” (libido!).

The motive of encoiling is mother symbolism.[496] This is verified by
the fact that the trees, for example, bring forth again (like the whale
in the legend of Jonah). They do that very generally, thus in the Greek
legend the Μελίαι νύμφαι[497] of the ash trees are the mothers of the
race of men of the Iron Age. In northern mythology, Askr, the ash tree,
is the primitive father. His wife, Embla, is the “Emsige,” the active
one, and not, as was earlier believed, the aspen. _Askr_ probably means,
in the first place, the phallic spear of the ash tree. (Compare the
Sabine custom of parting the bride’s hair with the lance.) The Bundehesh
symbolizes the first people, Meschia and Meschiane, as the tree Reivas,
one part of which places a branch in a hole of the other part. The
material which, according to the northern myth, was animated by the god
when he created men[498] is designated as _trê_ = wood, tree.[499] I
recall also ὕλη = wood, which in Latin is called _materia_. In the wood
of the “world-ash,” Ygdrasil, a human pair hid themselves at the end of
the world, from whom sprang the race of the renewed world.[500] The Noah
motive is easily recognized in this conception (the night journey on the
sea); at the same time, in the symbol of Ygdrasil, a mother idea is
again apparent. At the moment of the destruction of the world the
“world-ash” becomes the guardian mother, the tree of death and life, one
“ἐγκόλπιον.”[501][502] This function of rebirth of the “world-ash” also
helps to elucidate the representation met with in the Egyptian Book of
the Dead, which is called “the gate of knowledge of the soul of the
East”:

  “I am the pilot in the holy keel, I am the steersman who allows no
  rest in the ship of Râ.[503] I know that tree of emerald green from
  whose midst Râ rises to the height of the clouds.”[504]

Ship and tree of the dead (death ship and death tree) are here closely
connected. The conception is that Râ, born from the tree, ascends
(Osiris in the Erika). The representation of the sun-god Mithra is
probably explained in the same way. He is represented upon the
Heddernheim relief, with half his body arising from the top of a tree.
(In the same way numerous other monuments show Mithra half embodied in
the rock, and illustrate a rock birth, similar to Men.) Frequently there
is a stream near the birthplace of Mithra. This conglomeration of
symbols is also found in the birth of Aschanes, the first Saxon king,
who grew from the Harz rocks, which are in the midst of the wood[505]
near a fountain.[506] Here we find all the mother symbols united—earth,
wood, water, three forms of tangible matter. We can wonder no longer
that in the Middle Ages the tree was poetically addressed with the title
of honor, “mistress.” Likewise it is not astonishing that the Christian
legend transformed the tree of death, the cross, into the tree of life,
so that Christ was often represented on a living and fruit-bearing tree.
This reversion of the cross symbol to the tree of life, which even in
Babylon was an important and authentic religious symbol, is also
considered entirely probable by Zöckler,[507] an authority on the
history of the cross. The pre-Christian meaning of the symbol does not
contradict this interpretation; on the contrary, its meaning is life.
The appearance of the cross in the sun worship (here the cross with
equal arms, and the swastika cross, as representative of the sun’s
rays), as well as in the cult of the goddess of love (Isis with the crux
ansata, the rope, the speculum veneris ♀, etc.), in no way contradicts
the previous historical meaning. The Christian legend has made abundant
use of this symbolism.

[Illustration: CHRIST ON THE TREE OF LIFE]

The student of mediæval history is familiar with the representation of
the cross growing above the grave of Adam. The legend was that Adam was
buried on Golgotha. Seth had planted on his grave a branch of the
“paradise tree,” which became the cross and tree of death of
Christ.[508] We all know that through Adam’s guilt sin and death came
into the world, and Christ through his death has redeemed us from the
guilt. To the question in what had Adam’s guilt consisted it is said
that the unpardonable sin to be expiated by death was that he dared to
pick a fruit from the paradise tree.[509] The results of this are
described in an Oriental legend. One to whom it was permitted to cast
one look into Paradise after the fall saw the tree there and the four
streams. But the tree was withered, and in its branches lay an infant.
(The mother had become pregnant.[510])

This remarkable legend corresponds to the Talmudic tradition that Adam,
before Eve, already possessed a demon wife, by name Lilith, with whom he
_quarrelled for mastership_. But Lilith raised herself into the air
through the magic of the name of God and hid herself in the sea. Adam
forced her back with the help of three angels.[511] Lilith became a
nightmare, a Lamia, who threatened those with child and who kidnapped
the new-born child. The parallel myth is that of the Lamias, the
spectres of the night, who terrified the children. The original legend
is that Lamia enticed Zeus, but the jealous Hera, however, caused Lamia
to bring only dead children into the world. Since that time the raging
Lamia is the persecutor of children, whom she destroys wherever she can.
This motive frequently recurs in fairy tales, where the mother often
appears directly as a murderess or as a _devourer of men_;[512] a German
paradigm is the well-known tale of Hansel and Gretel. Lamia is actually
a large, voracious fish, which establishes the connection with the
whale-dragon myth so beautifully worked out by Frobenius, in which the
sea monster devours the sun-hero for rebirth and where the hero must
employ every stratagem to conquer the monster. Here again we meet with
the idea of the “terrible mother” in the form of the voracious fish, the
mouth of death.[513] In Frobenius there are numerous examples where the
monster has devoured not only men but also animals, plants, an entire
country, all of which are redeemed by the hero to a glorious rebirth.

The Lamias are typical nightmares, the feminine nature of which is
abundantly proven.[514] Their universal peculiarity is that they ride
upon their victims. Their counterparts are the spectral horses which
bear their riders along in a mad gallop. One recognizes very easily in
these symbolic forms the type of anxious dream which, as Riklin
shows,[515] has already become important for the interpretation of fairy
tales through the investigation of Laistner.[516] The typical riding
takes on a special aspect through the results of the analytic
investigation of infantile psychology; the two contributions of Freud
and myself[517] have emphasized, on one side, the anxiety significance
of the horse, on the other side the sexual meaning of the phantasy of
riding. When we take these experiences into consideration, we need no
longer be surprised that the maternal “world-ash” Ygdrasil is called in
German “the frightful horse.” Cannegieter[518] says of nightmares:

  “Abigunt eas nymphas (matres deas, mairas) hodie rustici osse capitis
  equini tectis injecto, cujusmodi ossa per has terras in rusticorum
  villis crebra est animadvertere. Nocte autem ad concubia equitare
  creduntur et equos fatigare ad longinqua itinera.”[519]

The connection of nightmare and horse seems, at first glance, to be
present also etymologically—nightmare and mare. The Indo-Germanic root
for märe is _mark_. Märe is the horse, English mare; Old High German
_marah_ (male horse) and _meriha_ (female horse); Old Norse _merr_
(_mara_ = nightmare); Anglo-Saxon _myre_ (_maira_). The French
“cauchmar” comes from _calcare_ = to tread, to step (of iterative
meaning, therefore, “to tread” or press down). It was also said of the
cock who stepped upon the hen. This movement is also typical for the
nightmare; therefore, it is said of King Vanlandi, “Mara trad han,” the
Mara trod on him in sleep even to death.[520] A synonym for nightmare is
the “troll” or “treter”[521] (treader). This movement (_calcare_) is
proven again by the experience of Freud and myself with children, where
a special infantile sexual significance is attached to stepping or
kicking.

The common Aryan root _mar_ means “to die”; therefore, _mara_ the “dead”
or “death.” From this results _mors_, μόρος = fate (also μοῖρα[522]). As
is well known, the Nornes sitting under the “world-ash” personify fate
like Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos. With the Celts the conception of the
Fates probably passes into that of _matres_ and _matronæ_, which had a
divine significance among the Germans. A well-known passage in Julius
Cæsar (“De Bello Gallico,” i: 50) informs us of this meaning of the
mother:

  “Ut matres familias eorum sortibus et vaticinationibus[523]
  declararent, utrum prœlium committi ex usu esset, nec ne.”[524]

In Slav _mara_ means “witch”; poln. _mora_ = demon, nightmare; _mōr_ or
_mōre_ (Swiss-German) means “sow,” also as an insult. The Bohemian
_mura_ means “nightmare” and “evening moth, Sphinx.” This strange
connection is explained through analysis where it often occurs that
animals with movable shells (Venus shell) or wings are utilized for very
transparent reasons as symbols of the female genitals.[525] The
Sphingina are the twilight moths; they, like the nightmare, come in the
darkness. Finally, it is to be observed that the sacred olive tree of
Athens is called “μορία” (that was derived from μόρος). Halirrhotios
wished to cut down the tree, but killed himself with the axe in the
attempt.

The sound resemblance of _mar_, _mère_ with _meer_ = sea and Latin
_mare_ = sea is remarkable, although etymologically accidental. Might it
refer back to “the great primitive idea of the mother” who, in the first
place, meant to us our individual world and afterwards became the symbol
of all worlds? Goethe said of the mothers: “They are encircled by images
of all creatures.” The Christians, too, could not refrain from reuniting
their mother of God with water. “Ave Maris stella” is the beginning of a
hymn to Mary. Then again it is the horses of Neptune which symbolize the
waves of the sea. It is probably of importance that the infantile word
ma-ma (mother’s breast) is repeated in its initial sound in all possible
languages, and that the mothers of two religious heroes are called Mary
and Maya. That the mother is the horse of the child is to be seen most
plainly in the primitive custom of carrying the child on the back or
letting it ride on the hip. Odin hung on the “world-ash,” the mother,
his “horse of terror.” The Egyptian sun-god sits on the back of his
mother, the heavenly cow.

We have already seen that, according to Egyptian conceptions, Isis, the
mother of god, played an evil trick on the sun-god with the poisonous
snake; also Isis behaved treacherously toward her son Horus in
Plutarch’s tradition. That is, Horus vanquished the evil Typhon, who
murdered Osiris treacherously (terrible mother = Typhon). Isis,
_however, set him free again_. Horus thereupon rebelled, _laid hands on
his mother and tore the regal ornaments from her head_, whereupon Hermes
gave her a cow’s head. Then Horus conquered Typhon a second time.
Typhon, in the Greek legend, is a monstrous dragon. Even without this
confirmation it is evident that the battle of Horus is the typical
battle of the sun-hero with the whale-dragon. Of the latter we know that
it is a symbol of the “dreadful mother,” of the voracious jaws of death,
where men are dismembered and ground up.[526] Whoever vanquishes this
monster has gained a new or eternal youth. For this purpose one must, in
spite of all dangers, descend into the belly of the monster[527]
(journey to hell) and spend some time there. (Imprisonment by night in
the sea.)

The battle with the night serpent signifies, therefore, the conquering
of the mother, who is suspected of an infamous crime, that is, the
betrayal of the son. A full confirmation of the connection comes to us
through the fragment of the Babylonian epic of the creation, discovered
by George Smith, mostly from the library of Asurbanipal. The period of
the origin of the text was probably in the time of Hammurabi (2,000
B.C.). We learn from this account of creation[528] that the sun-god Ea,
the son of the depths of the waters and the god of wisdom,[529] had
conquered Apsû. Apsû is the creator of the great gods (he existed in the
beginning in a sort of trinity with Tiâmat—the mother of gods and Mumu,
his vizier). Ea conquered the father, but Tiâmat plotted revenge. She
prepared herself for battle against the gods.

    “Mother Hubur, who created everything,
    Procured invincible weapons, gave birth to giant snakes
    With pointed teeth, relentless in every way;
    Filled their bellies with poison instead of blood,
    Furious gigantic lizards, clothed them with horrors,
    Let them swell with the splendor of horror, formed them rearing,
    Whoever sees them shall die of terror.
    Their bodies shall rear without turning to escape.
    She arrayed the lizards, dragons and Laḫamen,
    Hurricanes, mad dogs, scorpion men,
    Mighty storms, fishmen and rams.
    With relentless weapons, without fear of conflict,
    Powerful are Tiâmat’s commands, irresistible are they.

    “After Tiâmat had powerfully done her work
    She conceived evil against the gods, her descendants;
    In order to revenge Apsu, Tiâmat did evil.
    When Ea now heard this thing
    He became painfully anxious, sorrowfully he sat himself.
    He went to the father, his creator, Ans̆ar,
    To relate to him all that Tiâmat plotted.
    Tiâmat, our mother, has taken an aversion to us,
    Has prepared a riotous mob, furiously raging.”

The gods finally opposed Marduk, the god of spring, the victorious sun,
against the fearful host of Tiâmat. Marduk prepared for battle. Of his
chief weapon, which he created, it is said:

 “He created the evil wind, Imḫullu, the south storm and the hurricane,
 The fourth wind, the seventh wind, the whirlwind and the harmful wind,
 Then let he loose the winds, which he had created, the seven:
 To cause confusion within Tiâmat, they followed behind him,
 Then the lord took up the cyclone, his great weapon;
 For his chariot he mounted the stormwind, the incomparable, the terrible
    one.”

His chief weapon is the wind and a net, with which he will entangle
Tiâmat. He approaches Tiâmat and challenges her to a combat.

   “Then Tiâmat and Marduk, the wise one of the gods, came together,
   Rising for the fight, approaching to the battle:
   Then the lord spread out his net and caught her.
   He let loose the Imḫullu in his train at her face,
   Then Tiâmat now opened her mouth as wide as she could.
   He let the Imḫullu rush in so that her lips could not close;
   With the raging winds he filled her womb.
   Her inward parts were seized and she opened wide her mouth.
   He touched her with the spear, dismembered her body,
   He slashed her inward parts, and cut out her heart,
   Subdued her and put an end to her life.
   He threw down her body and stepped upon it.”

After Marduk slew the mother, he devised the creation of the world.

         “There the lord rested contemplating her body,
         Then divided he the Colossus, planning wisely.
         He cut it apart like a flat fish, into two parts,[530]
         One half he took and with it he covered the Heavens.”

In this manner Marduk created the universe from the mother. It is
clearly evident that the killing of the mother-dragon here takes place
under the idea of a wind fecundation with negative accompaniments.

The world is created from the mother, that is to say, from the libido
taken away from the mother through sacrifice. We shall have to consider
this significant formula more closely in the last chapter. The most
interesting parallels to this primitive myth are to be found in the
literature of the Old Testament, as Gunkel[531] has brilliantly pointed
out. It is worth while to trace the psychology of these parallels.

  _Isaiah_ li:9:

  (9) “Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake as in the
  ancient days, in the generation of old. Art thou not it that hath cut
  Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

  (10) “Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the
  great deep, that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the
  ransomed to pass over?”

The name of Rahab is frequently used for Egypt in the Old Testament,
also dragon. _Isaiah_, chapter xxx, verse 7, calls Egypt “the silent
Rahab,” and means, therefore, something evil and hostile. Rahab is the
well-known whore of Jericho, who later, as the wife of Prince Salma,
became the ancestress of Christ. Here Rahab appeared as the old dragon,
as Tiâmat, against whose evil power Marduk, or Jehovah, marched forth.
The expression “the ransomed” refers to the Jews freed from bondage, but
it is also mythological, for the hero again frees those previously
devoured by the whale. (Frobenius.)

  _Psalm_, lxxxix:10:

  “Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain.”

  _Job_ xxvi:12–13:

  “He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
  smiteth through the proud.

  “By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens, his hand hath formed the
  crooked serpent.”

Gunkel places Rahab as identical with Chaos, that is, the same as
Tiâmat. Gunkel translates “the breaking to pieces” as “violation.”
Tiâmat or Rahab as the mother is also the whore. Gilgamesh treats Ishtar
in this way when he accuses her of whoredom. This insult towards the
mother is very familiar to us from dream analysis. The dragon Rahab
appears also as Leviathan, the water monster (maternal sea).

  _Psalm_ lxxiv:

  (13) “Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the
  heads of the dragons in the waters.

  (14) “Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces and gavest him to
  be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.

  (15) “Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou didst dry up
  mighty rivers.”

While only the phallic meaning of the Leviathan was emphasized in the
first part of this work, we now discover also the maternal meaning. A
further parallel is:

  _Isaiah_ xxvii:1:

  “In that day, the Lord with his cruel and great and strong sword shall
  punish Leviathan, the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
  serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.”

We come upon a special motive in Job, chap. xli, v. 1:

  “Canst thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord
  which thou lettest down? Canst thou put an hook in his nose? or bore
  his jaw through with a thorn?”

Numerous parallels to this motive are to be found among exotic myths in
Frobenius, where the maternal sea monster was also fished for. The
comparison of the mother libido with the elementary powers of the sea
and the powerful monsters borne by the earth show how invincibly great
is the power of that libido which we designate as maternal.

We have already seen that the incest prohibition prevents the son from
reproducing himself through the mother. But this must be done by the
god, as is shown with remarkable clearness and candor in the pious
Egyptian mythology, which has preserved the most ancient and simple
concepts. Thus Chnum, the “moulder,” the “potter,” the “architect,”
moulds his egg upon the potter’s wheel, for he is “the immortal growth,”
“the reproduction of himself and his own rebirth, the creator of the
egg, which emerged from the primitive waters.” In the Book of the Dead
it says:

  “I am the sublime falcon (the Sun-god), which has come forth from his
  egg.”

Another passage in the Book of the Dead reads:

  “I am the creator of Nun, who has taken his place in the underworld.
  My nest is not seen and my egg is not broken.”

A further passage reads:

  “that great and noble god in his egg: who is his own originator of
  that which has arisen from him.”[532]

Therefore, the god Nagaga-uer is also called the “great cackler.” (Book
of the Dead.) “I cackle like a goose and I whistle like a falcon.” The
mother is reproached with the incest prohibition as an act of wilful
maliciousness by which she excludes the son from immortality. Therefore,
a god must at least rebel, overpower and chastise the mother. (Compare
Adam and Lilith, above.) The “overpowering” signifies incestuous
rape.[533] Herodotus[534] has preserved for us a valuable fragment of
this religious phantasy.

  “And how they celebrate their feast to Isis in the city of Busiris, I
  have already previously remarked. After the sacrifice, all of them,
  men and women, full ten thousand people, begin to beat each other. But
  it would be sin for me to mention for whom they do beat each other.

  “But in Papremis they celebrated the sacrifice with holy actions, as
  in the other places. About the time when the sun sets, some few
  priests are busy around the image; most of them stand at the entrance
  with wooden clubs, and others who would fulfil a vow, more than a
  thousand men, also stand in a group with wooden cudgels opposite them.

  “Now on the eve of the festival, they take the image out in a small
  and gilded temple into another sacred edifice. Then the few who remain
  with the image draw a four-wheeled chariot upon which the temple
  stands with the image which it encloses. But the others who stand in
  the anterooms are not allowed to enter. Those under a vow, who stand
  by the god, beat them off. Now occurs a furious battle with clubs, in
  which they bruise each other’s bodies and as I believe, many even die
  from their wounds: notwithstanding this, the Egyptians consider that
  none die.

  “The natives claim that this festival gathering was introduced for the
  following reason: in this sanctuary lived the mother of Ares.[535] Now
  Ares was brought up abroad and when he became a man he came to have
  _intercourse with his mother_. The servants of his mother who had seen
  him did not allow him to enter peacefully, but prevented him; at which
  he fetched people from another city, who mistreated the servants and
  had entrance to his mother. Therefore, they asserted that this
  slaughter was introduced at the feast for Ares.”

It is evident that the pious here fight their way to a share in the
mystery of the raping of the mother.[536] This is the part which belongs
to them,[537] while the heroic deed belongs to the god.[538] By Ares is
meant the Egyptian Typhon, as we have good reasons to suppose. _Thus
Typhon represents the evil longing for the mother_ with which other myth
forms reproach the mother, according to the well-known example. The
death of Balder, quite analogous to the death of Osiris (attack of
sickness of Rê), because of the wounding by the branch of the mistletoe,
seems to need a similar explanation. It is recounted in the myth how all
creatures were pledged not to hurt Balder, save only the mistletoe,
which was forgotten, presumably because it was too young. This killed
Balder. Mistletoe is a parasite. The female piece of wood in the
fire-boring ritual was obtained[539] from the wood of a parasitical or
creeping plant, the fire mother. The “mare” rests upon “Marentak,” in
which Grimm suspects the mistletoe. The mistletoe was a remedy against
barrenness. In Gaul the Druid alone was allowed to climb the holy oak
amid solemn ceremonies after the completed sacrifice, in order to cut
off the ritual mistletoe.[540] This act is a religiously limited and
organized incest. That which grows on the tree is the child,[541] which
man might have by the mother; then man himself would be in a renewed and
rejuvenated form; and precisely this is what man cannot have, because
the incest prohibition forbids it. As the Celtic custom shows, the act
is performed by the priest only, with the observation of certain
ceremonies; the hero god and the redeemer of the world, however, do the
unpermitted, the superhuman thing, and through it purchase immortality.
The dragon, who must be overcome for this purpose, means, as must have
been for some time clearly seen, the resistance against the incest.
Dragon and serpent, especially with the characteristic accumulation of
anxiety attributes, are the symbolic representations of anxiety which
correspond to the repressed incest wish. It is, therefore, intelligible,
when we come across the tree with the snake again and again (in Paradise
the snake even tempts to sin). The snake or dragon possesses in
particular the meaning of treasure guardian and defender. The phallic,
as well as the feminine, meaning of the dragon[542] indicates that it is
again a symbol of the sexual neutral (or bisexual) libido, that is to
say, a symbol of the _libido in opposition_. In this significance the
black horse, Apaosha, the demon of opposition, appears in the old
Persian song, Tishtriya, where it obstructs the sources of the rain
lake. The white horse Tishtriya makes two futile attempts to vanquish
Apaosha; at the third attempt, with the help of Ahuramazda, he is
successful.[543] Whereupon the sluices of heaven open and a fruitful
rain pours down upon the earth.[544] In this song one sees very
beautifully in the choice of symbol how libido is opposed to libido,
will against will, the discordance of primitive man with himself, which
he recognizes again in all the adversity and contrasts of external
nature.

The symbol of the tree encoiled by the serpent may also be translated as
the mother defended from incest by resistance. This symbol is by no
means rare upon Mithraic monuments. The rock encircled by a snake is to
be comprehended similarly, because Mithra is one born from a rock. The
menace of the new-born by the snake (Mithra, Hercules) is made clear
through the legend of Lilith and Lamia. Python, the dragon of Leto, and
Poine, who devastates the land of Crotopus, are sent by the father of
the new-born. This idea indicates the localization, well known in
psychoanalysis, of the incest anxiety in the father. The father
represents the active repulse of the incest wish of the son. The crime,
unconsciously wished for by the son, is imputed to the father under the
guise of a pretended murderous purpose, this being the cause of the
mortal fear of the son for the father, a frequent neurotic symptom. In
conformity with this idea, the monster to be overcome by the young hero
is frequently a giant, the guardian of the treasure or the woman. A
striking example is the giant Chumbaba in the Gilgamesh epic, who
protected the garden of Ishtar;[545] he is overcome by Gilgamesh,
whereby Ishtar is won. Thereupon she makes erotic advances towards
Gilgamesh.[546] This data should be sufficient to render intelligible
the rôle of Horus in Plutarch, especially the violent usage of Isis.
Through overpowering the mother the hero becomes equal to the sun; he
reproduces himself. He wins the strength of the invincible sun, the
power of eternal rejuvenation. We thus understand a series of
representations from the Mithraic myth on the Heddernheim relief. There
we see, first of all, the birth of Mithra from the top of the tree; the
next representation shows him carrying the conquered bull (comparable to
the monstrous bull overcome by Gilgamesh). This bull signifies the
concentrated significance of the monster, the father, who as giant and
dangerous animal embodies the incest prohibition, and agrees with the
individual libido of the sun-hero, which he overcomes by self-sacrifice.
The third picture represents Mithra, when he grasps the head ornament of
the sun, the nimbus. This act recalls to us, first of all, the violence
of Horus towards Isis; secondly, the Christian basic thought, _that
those who have overcome attain the crown of eternal life_. On the fourth
picture Sol kneels before Mithra. These last two representations show
plainly that Mithra has taken to himself the strength of the sun, so
that he becomes the lord of the sun as well. He has conquered “his
animal nature,” the bull. The animal knows no incest prohibition; man
is, therefore, man because he conquers the incest wish, that is, the
animal nature. Thus Mithra has sacrificed his animal nature, the incest
wish, and with that has overcome the mother, that is to say, “the
terrible death-bringing mother.” A solution is already anticipated in
the Gilgamesh epic through the formal renunciation of the horrible
Ishtar by the hero. The overcoming of the mother in the Mithraic
sacrifice, which had almost an ascetic character, took place no longer
by the archaic overpowering, but through the renunciation, the sacrifice
of the wish. The primitive thought of incestuous reproduction through
entrance into the mother’s womb had already been displaced, because man
was so far advanced in domestication that he believed that the eternal
life of the sun is reached, not through the perpetration of incest, but
through the sacrifice of the incest wish. This important change
expressed in the Mithraic mystery finds its full expression for the
first time in the symbol of the crucified God. A bleeding human
sacrifice was hung on the tree of life for Adam’s sins.[547] The
first-born sacrifices its life to the mother when he suffers, hanging on
the branch, a disgraceful and painful death, a mode of death which
belongs to the most ignominious forms of execution, which Roman
antiquity had reserved for only the lowest criminal. Thus the hero dies,
as if he had committed the most shameful crime; he does this by
returning into the birth-giving branch of the tree of life, at the same
time paying for his guilt with the pangs of death. The animal nature is
repressed most powerfully in this deed of the highest courage and the
greatest renunciation; therefore, a greater salvation is to be expected
for humanity, because such a deed alone seems appropriate to expiate
Adam’s guilt.

[Illustration: BULL-SACRIFICE OF MITHRA]

As has already been mentioned, the hanging of the sacrifice on the tree
is a generally widespread ritual custom, Germanic examples being
especially abundant. The ritual consists in the sacrifice being pierced
by a spear.[548] Thus it is said of Odin (Edda, Havamal):

               “I know that I hung on the windswept tree
               Nine nights through,
               Wounded by a spear, dedicated to Odin
               I myself to myself.”

The hanging of the sacrifice to the cross also occurred in America prior
to its discovery. Müller[549] mentions the Fejervaryian manuscript (a
Mexican hieroglyphic kodex), at the conclusion of which there is a
colossal cross, in the middle of which there hangs a bleeding divinity.
Equally interesting is the cross of Palenque;[550] up above is a bird,
on either side two human figures, who look at the cross and hold a child
against it either for sacrifice or baptism. The old Mexicans are said to
have invoked the favor of Centeotls, “the daughter of heaven and the
goddess of wheat,” every spring by nailing upon the cross a youth or a
maiden and by shooting the sacrifice with arrows.[551] The name of the
Mexican cross signifies “tree of our life or flesh.”[552]

An effigy from the Island of Philae represents Osiris in the form of a
crucified god, wept over by Isis and Nephthys, the sister consort.[553]

The meaning of the cross is certainly not limited to the tree of life,
as has already been shown. Just as the tree of life has also a phallic
sub-meaning (as libido symbol), so there is a further significance to
the cross than life and immortality.[554] Müller uses it as a sign of
rain and of fertility, because it appears among the Indians distinctly
as a magic charm of fertility. It goes without saying, therefore, that
it plays a rôle in the sun cult. It is also noteworthy that the sign of
the cross is an important sign for the keeping away of all evil, like
the ancient gesture of Manofica. The phallic amulets also serve the same
purpose. Zöckler appears to have overlooked the fact that the phallic
Crux Ansata is the same cross which has flourished in countless examples
in the soil of antiquity. Copies of this Crux Ansata are found in many
places, and almost every collection of antiquities possesses one or more
specimens.[555]

Finally, it must be mentioned that the form of the human body is
imitated in the cross as of a man with arms outspread. It is remarkable
that in early Christian representations Christ is not nailed to the
cross, but stands before it with arms outstretched.[556] Maurice[557]
gives a striking basis for this interpretation when he says:

  “It is a fact not less remarkable than well attested, that the Druids
  in their groves were accustomed to select the most stately and
  beautiful tree as an emblem of the deity they adored, and cutting off
  the side branches, they affixed two of the largest of them to the
  highest part of the trunk, in such a manner that those branches
  extended on each side like the arms of a man, and together with the
  body presented the appearance of a huge cross; and in the bark in
  several places was also inscribed the letter Τ (tau).”[558]

“The tree of knowledge” of the Hindoo Dschaina sect assumes human form;
it was represented as a mighty, thick trunk in the form of a human head,
from the top of which grew out two longer branches hanging down at the
sides and one short, vertical, uprising branch crowned by a bud or
blossom-like thickening.[559] Robertson in his “Evangelical Myths”
mentions that in the Assyrian system there exists the representation of
the divinity in the form of a cross, in which the vertical beam
corresponds to a human form and the horizontal beam to a pair of
conventionalized wings. Old Grecian idols such, for example, as were
found in large numbers in Aegina have a similar character, an
immoderately long head and arms slightly raised, wing-shaped, and in
front distinct breasts.[560]

I must leave it an open question as to whether the symbol of the cross
has any relation to the two pieces of wood in the religious fire
production, as is frequently claimed. It does appear, however, as if the
cross symbol actually still possessed the significance of “union,” for
this idea belongs to the fertility charm, and especially to the thought
of eternal rebirth, which is most intimately bound up with the cross.
The thought of “union,” expressed by the symbol of the cross, is met
with in “Timaios” of Plato, where the world soul is conceived as
stretched out between heaven and earth in the form of an X (Chi); hence
in the form of a “St. Andrew’s cross.” When we now learn, furthermore,
that the world soul contains in itself _the world as a body_, then this
picture inevitably reminds us of the mother.

  (_Dialogues of Plato._ Jowett, Vol. II, page 528.)

  “And in the center he put the soul, which he diffused through the
  whole, and also spread over all the body round about, and he made one
  solitary and only heaven, a circle moving in a circle, having such
  excellence as to be able to hold converse with itself, and needing no
  other friendship or acquaintance. Having these purposes in view he
  created the world to be a blessed god.”

This highest degree of inactivity and freedom from desire, symbolized
by the _being enclosed within itself_, signifies divine blessedness.
The only human prototype of this conception is the child in the
mother’s womb, or rather more, the adult man in the continuous embrace
of the mother, from whom he originates. Corresponding to this
mythologic-philosophic conception, the enviable Diogenes inhabited a
tub, thus giving mythologic expression to the blessedness and
resemblance to the Divine in his freedom from desire. Plato says as
follows of the bond of the world soul to the world body:

  “Now God did not make the soul after the body, although we have spoken
  of them in this order; for when he put them together he would never
  have allowed that the elder should serve the younger, but this is what
  we say at random, because we ourselves too are very largely affected
  by chance. Whereas he made the soul in origin and excellence prior to
  and older than the body, to be the ruler and mistress, of whom the
  body was to be the subject.”

It seems conceivable from other indications that the conception of the
soul in general is a derivative of the mother-imago, that is to say, a
symbolic designation for the amount of libido remaining in the
mother-imago. (Compare the Christian representation of the soul as the
bride of Christ.) The further development of the world soul in “Timaios”
takes place in an obscure fashion in mystic numerals. When the mixture
was completed the following occurred:

  “This entire compound he divided lengthways into two parts, which he
  joined to one another at the center like the figure of an X.”

This passage approaches very closely the division and union of Atman,
who, after the division, is compared to a man and a woman who hold each
other in an embrace. Another passage is worth mentioning:

  “After the entire union of the soul had taken place, according to the
  master’s mind, he formed all that is corporeal within this, and joined
  it together so as to penetrate it throughout.”

Moreover, I refer to my remarks about the maternal meaning of the world
soul in Plotinus, in Chapter II.

A similar detachment of the symbol of the cross from a concrete figure
we find among the Muskhogean Indians, who stretch above the surface of
the water (pond or stream) two ropes crosswise and at the point of
intersection throw into the water fruits, oil and precious stones as a
sacrifice.[561] Here the divinity is evidently the water, not the cross,
which designates the place of sacrifice only, through the point of
intersection. The sacrifice at the place of union indicates why this
symbol was a primitive charm of fertility,[562] why we meet it so
frequently in the prechristian era among the goddesses of love (mother
goddesses), especially among the Egyptians in Isis and the sun-god. We
have already discussed the continuous union of these two divinities. As
the cross (Tau [Τ], Crux Ansata) always recurs in the hand of Tum, the
supreme God, the hegemon of the Ennead, it may not be superfluous to say
something more of the destination of Tum. The Tum of On-Heliopolis bears
the name “the father of his mother”; what that means needs no
explanation; Jusas or Nebit-Hotpet, the goddess joined to him, _was
called sometimes the mother, sometimes the daughter, sometimes the wife
of the god_. The day of the beginning of autumn is designated in the
Heliopolitan inscriptions as the “festival of the goddess Jusasit,” as
“the arrival of the sister for the purpose of uniting with her father.”
It is the day in which “the goddess Mehnit completes her work, so that
the god Osiris may enter into the left eye.” (By which the moon is
meant.[563]) The day is also called the filling up of the sacred eye
with its needs. The heavenly cow with the moon eye, the cow-headed Isis,
takes to herself in the autumn equinox the seed which procreates Horus.
(Moon as keeper of the seed.) The “eye” evidently represents the
genitals, as in the myth of Indra, who had to bear spread over his whole
body the likeness of Yoni (vulva), on account of a Bathsheba outrage,
but was so far pardoned by the gods that the disgraceful likeness of
Yoni was changed into eyes.[564] The “pupil” in the eye is a child. The
great god becomes a child again; he enters the mother’s womb in order to
renew himself.[565] In a hymn it is said:

  “Thy mother, the heavens, stretches forth her arms to thee.”

In another place it is said:

  “Thou shinest, oh father of the gods, upon the back of thy mother,
  daily thy mother takes thee in her arms. When thou illuminatest the
  dwelling of night, thou unitest with thy mother, the heavens.”[566]

The Tum of Pitum-Heliopolis not only bears the Crux Ansata as a symbol,
but also has this sign as his most frequent surname, that is, ānχ or
ānχi, which means “life” or “the living.” He is chiefly honored as the
demon serpent, Agatho, of whom it is said, “The holy demon serpent
Agatho goes forth from the city Nezi.” The snake, on account of casting
its skin, is the symbol of renewal, as is the scarabæus, a symbol of the
sun, of whom it is said that he, being of masculine sex only, reproduces
himself.

The name Chnum (another name for Tum, always meaning “the sun-god”)
comes from the verb χnum, which means “to bind together, to unite.”[567]
Chnum appears chiefly as the potter, the moulder of his egg. The cross
seems, therefore, to be an extraordinarily condensed symbol; its supreme
meaning is that of the tree of life, and, therefore, is a symbol of the
mother. The symbolization in a human form is, therefore, intelligible.
The phallic forms of the Crux Ansata belong to the abstract meaning of
“life” and “fertility,” as well as to the meaning of “union,” which we
can now very properly interpret as _cohabitation with the mother for the
purpose of renewal_.[568] It is, therefore, not only a very touching but
also a very significant naïve symbolism when Mary, in an Old English
lament of the Virgin,[569] accuses the cross of being a false tree,
which unjustly and without reason destroyed “the pure fruit of her body,
her gentle birdling,” with a poisonous draught, the draught of death,
which is destined only for the guilty descendants of the sinner Adam.
Her son was not a sharer in that guilt. (Compare with this the cunning
of Isis with the fatal draught of love.) Mary laments:

  “Cross, thou art the evil stepmother of my son, so high hast thou hung
  him that I cannot even kiss his feet! Cross, thou art my mortal enemy,
  thou hast slain my little blue bird!”

The holy cross answers:

  “Woman, I thank thee for my honor: thy splendid fruit, which now I
  bear, shines as a red blossom.[570] Not alone to save thee but to save
  the whole world this precious flower blooms in thee.”[571]

Santa Crux says of the relation to each other of the two mothers (Isis
in the morning and Isis in the evening):

  “Thou hast been crowned as Queen of Heaven on account of the child,
  which thou hast borne. But I shall appear as the shining relic to the
  whole world, at the day of judgment. I shall then raise my lament for
  thy divine son innocently slain upon me.”

Thus the murderous mother of death unites with the mother of life in
bringing forth a child. In their lament for the dying God, and as
outward token of their union, Mary kisses the cross, and is reconciled
to it.[572] The naïve Egyptian antiquity has preserved for us the union
of the contrasting tendencies in the mother idea of Isis. Naturally this
imago is merely a symbol of the libido of the son for the mother, and
describes the conflict between love and incest resistance. The criminal
incestuous purpose of the son appears projected as criminal cunning in
the mother-imago. The separation of the son from the mother signifies
the separation of man from the generic consciousness of animals, from
that infantile archaic thought characterized by the absence of
individual consciousness.

It was only the power of the incest prohibition which created the
self-conscious individual, who formerly had been thoughtlessly one with
the tribe, and in this way alone did the idea of individual and final
death become possible. Thus through the sin of Adam death came into the
world. This, as is evident, is expressed figuratively, that is, in
contrast form. The mother’s defence against the incest appears to the
son as a malicious act, which delivers him over to the fear of death.
This conflict faces us in the Gilgamesh epic in its original freshness
and passion, where also the incest wish is projected onto the mother.

The neurotic who cannot leave the mother has good reasons; the fear of
death holds him there. It seems as if no idea and no word were strong
enough to express the meaning of this. Entire religions were constructed
in order to give words to the immensity of this conflict. This struggle
for expression which continued down through the centuries certainly
cannot have its source in the restricted realm of the vulgar conception
of incest. Rather one must understand the law which is ultimately
expressed as “Incest prohibition” as coercion to domestication, and
consider the religious systems as institutions which first receive, then
organize and gradually sublimate, the motor forces of the animal nature
not immediately available for cultural purposes.

We will now return to the visions of Miss Miller. Those now following
need no further detailed discussion. The next vision is the image of a
“purple bay.” The symbolism of the sea connects smoothly with that which
precedes. One might think here in addition of the reminiscences of the
Bay of Naples, which we came across in Part I. In the sequence of the
whole, however, we must not overlook the significance of the “bay.” In
French it is called _une baie_, which probably corresponds to a bay in
the English text. It might be worth while here to glance at the
etymological side of this idea. Bay is generally used for something
which is open, just as the Catalonian word _badia_ (_bai_) comes from
_badar_, “to open.” In French _bayer_ means “to have the mouth open, to
gape.” Another word for the same is _Meerbusen_, “bay or gulf”; Latin
_sinus_, and a third word is golf (gulf), which in French stands in
closest relation to _gouffre_ = abyss. Golf is derived from
“κόλπος,”[573] which also means “bosom” and “womb,” “mother-womb,” also
“vagina.” It can also mean a fold of a dress or pocket; it may also mean
a deep valley between high mountains. These expressions clearly show
what primitive ideas lie at their base. They render intelligible
Goethe’s choice of words at that place where Faust wishes to follow the
sun with winged desire in order in the everlasting day “to drink its
eternal light”:

             “The mountain chain with all its gorges deep,
             Would then no more impede my godlike motion;
             And now before mine eyes expands the ocean,
             With all its bays, in shining sleep!”

Faust’s desire, like that of every hero, inclines towards the mysteries
of rebirth, of immortality; therefore, his course leads to the sea, and
down into the monstrous jaws of death, the horror and narrowness of
which at the same time signify the new day.

      “Out on the open ocean speeds my dreaming:
      The glassy flood before my feet is gleaming,
      A new day beckons to a newer shore!
      A fiery chariot borne on buoyant pinions,
      Sweeps near me now! I soon shall ready be
      To pierce the ether’s high, unknown dominions,
      To reach new spheres of pure activity!
      This Godlike rapture, this supreme existence....

             ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

      “Yes, let me dare those gates to fling asunder,
      Which every man would fain go slinking by!
      ’Tis time, through deeds this word of truth to thunder;
      That with the height of God’s Man’s dignity may vie!
      Nor from that gloomy gulf to shrink affrighted,
      Where fancy doth herself to self-born pangs compel,—
      To struggle toward that pass benighted,
      Around whose narrow mouth flame all the fires of Hell:—
      To take this step with cheerful resolution,
      Though Nothingness should be the certain swift conclusion!”

It sounds like a confirmation, when the succeeding vision of Miss
Miller’s is _une falaise à pic_, “a steep, precipitous cliff.” (Compare
_gouffre_.) The entire series of individual visions is completed, as the
author observes, by a confusion of sounds, somewhat resembling “wa-ma,
wa-ma.” This has a very primitive, barbaric sound. Since we learn from
the author nothing of the subjective roots of this sound, nothing is
left us but the suspicion that this sound might be considered, taken in
connection with the whole, as a slight mutilation of the well-known call
ma-ma.