In a valuable book called “The Neighbor,” written by the late Professor
N. Shaler of Harvard University, there occurs this very far-reaching
statement: “It is hardly too much to say that all the important errors
of conduct, all the burdens of men or of societies are caused by the
inadequacies in the association of the primal animal emotions with those
mental powers which have been so rapidly developed in mankind.”

This statement, reached by a process of reasoning and a method of
thought and study entirely different from psychoanalysis, nevertheless
so completely expresses in brief form the very basis of the postulates
developed through psychoanalysis that I quote it here. Such a statement
made in the course of a general examination of human relations does not
arouse opposition nor seem to be so difficult of acceptance. It appears
to be the individual application of these conceptions that has roused
such bitter antagonism and violent denunciations.

Rightly understood and used, psychoanalysis may be compared to surgery,
for psychoanalysis stands in the same relation to the personality as
surgery does to the body, and they aim at parallel results.

It is well recognized that in the last analysis nature is the real
physician, the healer of wounds; but prior to the development of our
modern asepsis and surgical technique the healing produced by nature was
most often of a very faulty and imperfect type—hideous scars, distorted
and crippled limbs, with functions impaired or incapacitated, resulted
from the wounds, or else nature was unable to cope with the hurt and the
injured one succumbed.

Science has been steadily working for centuries with the aim of
understanding nature and finding means to aid and co-operate with her so
that healing could take place with the least possible loss of function
or permanent injury to the individual. Marvelous results have rewarded
these persistent efforts, as the brilliant achievements of surgery
plainly indicate.

Meantime, however, little thought was given to the possibility of any
scientific method being available to help man overcome the wounds and
conflicts taking place in his soul, hurts which retarded his development
and progress as a personality, and which frequently in the struggle
resulted in physical pains and symptoms of the most varied character.
That was left solely to religion and metaphysics. Now, however, this
same assistance that surgery has given to the physical body,
psychoanalysis attempts to give to the personality. That it cannot
always succeed is as much to be expected, and more, than that surgery
does not always succeed, for the analytic work requires much of the
individual. No real result can be attained if he has not already
developed a certain quality of character and intelligence which makes it
possible for him to submit himself to a facing of his naked soul, and to
the pain and suffering which this often entails. Here, as in no other
relation in life, an absolute truth and an absolute honesty are the only
basis of action, since deception of any kind deceives no one but the
individual himself and acts as a boomerang, defeating his own aims.

Such deep searching and penetrating into the soul is not something to be
undertaken lightly nor to be considered a trivial or simple matter, and
the fact is that where a strong compulsion is lacking, such as sickness
or a situation too difficult to meet, much courage is required to
undertake it.

In order to understand this psychology which is pervading all realms of
thought and seems destined to be a new psychological-philosophical
system for the understanding and practical advancement of human life, it
will be necessary to go somewhat into detail regarding its development
and present status. For in this new direction lies its greatest value
and its greatest danger.