
The second chapter in Miss Miller’s work is entitled, “Gloire à Dieu.
Poème onirique.”

When twenty years of age, Miss Miller took a long journey through
Europe. We leave the description of it to her:

  “After a long and rough journey from New York to Stockholm, from there
  to Petersburg and Odessa, I found it a true pleasure[60] to leave the
  world of inhabited cities—and to enter the world of waves, sky and
  silence—I stayed hours long on deck to dream, stretched out in a
  reclining chair. The histories, legends and myths of the different
  countries which I saw in the distance, came back to me indistinctly
  blended together in a sort of luminous mist, in which things lost
  their reality, while the dreams and thoughts alone took on somewhat
  the appearance of reality. At first, I even avoided all company and
  kept to myself, lost wholly in my dreams, where all that I knew of
  great, beautiful and good came back into my consciousness with new
  strength and new life. I also employed a great part of my time writing
  to my distant friends, reading and sketching out short poems about the
  regions visited. Some of these poems were of a very serious
  character.”

It may seem superfluous, perhaps, to enter intimately into all these
details. If we recall, however, the remark made above,—that when people
let their unconscious speak, they always tell us the most important
things of their intimate selves—then even the smallest detail appears to
have meaning. Valuable personalities invariably tell us, through their
unconscious, things that are generally valuable, so that patient
interest is rewarded.

Miss Miller describes here a state of “introversion.” After the life of
the cities with their many impressions had been absorbing her interest
(with that already discussed strength of suggestion which powerfully
enforced the impression) she breathed freely upon the ocean, and after
so many external impressions, became engrossed wholly in the internal
with intentional abstraction from the surroundings, so that things lost
their reality and dreams became truth. We know from psychopathology that
certain mental disturbances[61] exist which are first manifested by the
individuals shutting themselves off slowly, more and more, from reality
and sinking into their phantasies, during which process, in proportion
as the reality loses its hold, the inner world gains in reality and
determining power.[62] This process leads to a certain point (which
varies with the individual) when the patients suddenly become more or
less conscious of their separation from reality. The event which then
enters is the pathological excitation: that is to say, the patients
begin to turn towards the environment, with diseased views (to be sure)
which, however, still represent the compensating, although unsuccessful,
attempt at transference.[63] The methods of reaction are, naturally,
very different. I will not concern myself more closely about this here.

This type appears to be generally a psychological rule which holds good
for all neuroses and, therefore, also for the normal in a much less
degree. We might, therefore, expect that Miss Miller, after this
energetic and persevering introversion, which had even encroached for a
time upon the feeling of reality, would succumb anew to an impression of
the real world and also to just as suggestive and energetic an influence
as that of her dreams. Let us proceed with the narrative:

  “But as the journey drew to an end, the ship’s officers outdid
  themselves in kindness (tout ce qu’il y a de plus empressé et de plus
  aimable) and I passed many amusing hours teaching them English. On the
  Sicilian coast, in the harbor of Catania, I wrote a sailor’s song
  which was very similar to a song well known on the sea, (Brine, wine
  and damsels fine). The Italians in general all sing very well, and one
  of the officers who sang on deck during night watch, had made a great
  impression upon me and had given me the idea of writing some words
  adapted to his melody. Soon after that, I was very nearly obliged to
  reverse the well-known saying, ‘Veder Napoli e poi morir,’—that is to
  say, suddenly I became very ill, although not dangerously so. I
  recovered to such an extent, however, that I could go on land to visit
  the sights of the city in a carriage. This day tired me very much, and
  since we had planned to see Pisa the following day, I went on board
  early in the evening and soon lay down to sleep without thinking of
  anything more serious than the beauty of the officers and the ugliness
  of the Italian beggars.”

One is somewhat disappointed at meeting here, instead of the expected
impression of reality, rather a small intermezzo, a flirtation.
Nevertheless, one of the officers, the singer, had made a great
impression (il m’avait fait beaucoup d’impression). The remark at the
close of the description, “sans songer à rien de plus sérieux qu’à la
beauté des officiers,” and so on, diminishes the seriousness of the
impression, it is true. The assumption, however, that the impression
openly influenced the mood very much, is supported by the fact that a
poem upon a subject of such an erotic character came forth immediately,
“Brine, wine and damsels fine,” and in the singer’s honor. One is only
too easily inclined to take such an impression lightly, and one admits
so gladly the statements of the participators when they represent
everything as simple and not at all serious. I dwell upon this
impression at length, because it is important to know that an erotic
impression after such an introversion, has a deep effect and is
undervalued, possibly, by Miss Miller. The suddenly passing sickness is
obscure and needs a psychologic interpretation which cannot be touched
upon here because of lack of data. The phenomena now to be described can
only be explained as arising from a disturbance which reaches to the
very depths of her being.

  “From Naples to Livorno, the ship travelled for a night, during which
  I slept more or less well,—my sleep, however, is seldom deep or
  dreamless. It seemed to me as if my mother’s voice wakened me, just at
  the end of the following dream. At first I had a vague conception of
  the words, ‘When the morning stars sang together,’ which were the
  praeludium of a certain confused representation of creation and of the
  mighty chorals resounding through the universe. In spite of the
  strange, contradictory and confused character which is peculiar to the
  dream, there was mingled in it the chorus of an oratorio which has
  been given by one of the foremost musical societies of New York, and
  with that were also memories of Milton’s ‘Paradise Lost.’ Then from
  out of this whirl, there slowly emerged certain words, which arranged
  themselves into three strophes and, indeed, they seemed to be in my
  own handwriting on ordinary blue-lined writing paper on a page of my
  old poetry book which I always carried around with me; in short, they
  appeared to me exactly as some minutes later they were in reality in
  my book.”

Miss Miller now wrote down the following poem, which she rearranged
somewhat a few months later, to make it more nearly, in her opinion,
like the dream original.

              “When the Eternal first made Sound
              A myriad ears sprang out to hear,
              And throughout all the Universe
              There rolled an echo deep and clear:
              All glory to the God of Sound!

              “When the Eternal first made Light
              A myriad eyes sprang out to look,
              And hearing ears and seeing eyes
              Once more a mighty choral took:
              All glory to the God of Light!

              “When the Eternal first gave Love
              A myriad hearts sprang into life;
              Ears filled with music, eyes with light;
              Pealed forth with hearts with love all rife:
              All glory to the God of Love!”

Before we enter upon Miss Miller’s attempt to bring to light through her
suppositions[64] the root of this subliminal creation, we will attempt a
short analytic survey of the material already in our possession. The
impression on the ship has already been properly emphasized, so that we
need have no further difficulty in gaining possession of the dynamic
process which brought about this poetical revelation. It was made clear
in the preceding paragraphs that Miss Miller possibly had not
inconsiderably undervalued the importance of the erotic impression. This
assumption gains in probability through experience, which shows that,
very generally, relatively weak erotic impressions are greatly
undervalued. One can see this best in cases where those concerned,
either from social or moral grounds, consider an erotic relation as
something quite impossible; for example, parents and children, brothers
and sisters, relations (homosexual) between older and younger men, and
so on. If the impression is relatively slight, then it does not exist at
all for the participators; if the impression is strong, then a tragic
dependence arises, which may result in some great nonsense, or be
carried to any extent. This lack of understanding can go unbelievably
far; mothers, who see the first erections of the small son in their own
bed, a sister who half-playfully embraces her brother, a twenty-year-old
daughter who still seats herself on her father’s lap, and then has
“strange” sensations in her “abdomen.” They are all morally indignant to
the highest degree if one speaks of “sexuality.” Finally, our whole
education is carried on with the tacit agreement to know as little as
possible of the erotic, and to spread abroad the deepest ignorance in
regard to it. It is no wonder, therefore, that the judgment, _in
puncto_, of the importance of an erotic impression is generally unsafe
and inadequate.

Miss Miller was under the influence of a deep erotic impression, as we
have seen. Because of the sum-total of the feelings aroused by this, it
does not seem that this impression was more than dimly realized, for the
dream had to contain a powerful repetition. From analytic experience,
one knows that the early dreams which patients bring for analysis are
none the less of especial interest, because of the fact that they bring
out criticisms and valuations of the physician’s personality, which
previously, would have been asked for directly in vain. They enrich the
conscious impression which the patient had of his physician, and often
concerning very important points. They are naturally erotic observations
which the unconscious was forced to make, just because of the quite
universal undervaluation and uncertain judgment of the relatively weak
erotic impression. In the drastic and hyperbolic manner of expression of
the dream, the impression often appears in almost unintelligible form on
account of the immeasurable dimension of the symbol. A further
peculiarity which seems to rest upon the historic strata of the
unconscious, is this—that an erotic impression, to which conscious
acknowledgment is denied, usurps an earlier and discarded transference
and expresses itself in that. Therefore, it frequently happens, for
example, that among young girls at the time of their first love,
remarkable difficulties develop in the capacity for erotic expression,
which may be reduced analytically to disturbances through a regressive
attempt at resuscitation of the father image, or the “Father-Imago.”[65]

Indeed, one might presume something similar in Miss Miller’s case, for
the idea of the masculine creative deity is a derivation, analytically
and historically psychologic, of the “Father-Imago,”[66] and aims, above
all, to replace the discarded infantile father transference in such a
way that for the individual the passing from the narrow circle of the
family into the wider circle of human society may be simpler or made
easier.

In the light of this reflection, we can see, in the poem and its
“Praeludium,” the religious, poetically formed product of an
introversion depending upon the surrogate of the “Father-Imago.” In
spite of the incomplete apperception of the effectual impression,
essential component parts of this are included in the idea of
compensation, as marks, so to speak, of its origin. (Pfister has coined
for this the striking expression, “Law of the Return of the Complex.”)
The effectual impression was that of the officer singing in the night
watch, “When the morning stars sang together.” The idea of this opened a
new world to the girl. (Creation.)

This creator has created tone, then light, and then love. That the first
to be created should have been tone, can be made clear only
individually, for there is no cosmogony except the Gnosis of Hermes, a
generally quite unknown system, which would have such tendencies. But
now we might venture a conjecture, which is already apparent, and which
soon will be proven thoroughly, viz., the following chain of
associations: the singer—the singing morning stars—the God of tone—the
Creator—the God of Light—(of the sun)—(of the fire)—and of Love.

The links of this chain are proven by the material, with the exception
of sun and fire, which I put in parentheses, but which, however, will be
proven through what follows in the further course of the analysis. All
of these expressions, with one exception, belong to erotic speech. (“My
God, star, light; my sun, fire of love, fiery love,” etc.) “Creator”
appears indistinct at first, but becomes understandable through the
reference to the undertone of Eros, to the vibrating chord of Nature,
which attempts to renew itself in every pair of lovers, and awaits the
wonder of creation.

Miss Miller had taken pains to disclose the unconscious creation of her
mind to her understanding, and, indeed through a procedure which agrees
in principle with psychoanalysis, and, therefore, leads to the same
results as psychoanalysis. But, as usually happens with laymen and
beginners, Miss Miller, because she had no knowledge of psychoanalysis,
left off at the thoughts which necessarily bring the deep complex lying
at the bottom of it to light in an indirect, that is to say, censored
manner. More than this, a simple method, merely the carrying out of the
thought to its conclusion, is sufficient to discover the meaning. Miss
Miller finds it astonishing that her unconscious phantasy does not,
following the Mosaic account of creation, put light in the first place,
instead of tone.

Now follows an explanation, theoretically constructed and correct ad
hoc, the hollowness of which is, however, characteristic of all similar
attempts at explanation. She says:

  “It is perhaps interesting to recall that Anaxagoras also had the
  Cosmos arise out of chaos through a sort of whirlwind, which does not
  happen usually without producing sound.[67] But at this time I had
  studied no philosophy, and knew nothing either of Anaxagoras or of his
  theories about the ‘νοῦς,’ which I, unconsciously, was openly
  following. At that time, also, I was equally in complete ignorance of
  Leibnitz, and, therefore, knew nothing of his doctrine ‘dum Deus
  calculat, fit mundus.’”

Miss Miller’s references to Anaxagoras and to Leibnitz both refer to
creation by means of thought; that is to say, that divine thought alone
could bring forth a new material reality, a reference at first not
intelligible, but which will soon, however, be more easily understood.

We now come to those fancies from which Miss Miller principally drew her
unconscious creation.

  “In the first place, there is the ‘Paradise Lost’ by Milton, which we
  had at home in the edition illustrated by Doré, and which had often
  delighted me from childhood. Then the ‘Book of Job,’ which had been
  read aloud to me since the time of my earliest recollection. Moreover,
  if one compares the first words of ‘Paradise Lost’ with my first
  verse, one notices that there is the same verse measure.

                    “‘Of man’s first disobedience ...

                  “‘When the Eternal first made sound.’

  “My poem also recalls various passages in Job, and one or two places
  in Handel’s Oratorio ‘The Creation,’ which came out very indistinctly
  in the first part of the dream.”[68]

The “Lost Paradise” which, as is well known, is so closely connected
with the beginning of the world, is made more clearly evident by the
verse—

  “Of man’s first disobedience”

which is concerned evidently with the fall, the meaning of which need
not be shown any further. I know the objection which every one
unacquainted with psychoanalysis will raise, viz., that Miss Miller
might just as well have chosen any other verse as an example, and that,
accidentally, she had taken the first one that happened to appear which
had this content, also accidentally. As is well known, the criticism
which we hear equally from our medical colleagues, and from our
patients, is generally based on such arguments. This misunderstanding
arises from the fact that the law of causation in the psychical sphere
is not taken seriously enough; that is to say, there are no accidents,
no “just as wells.” It is so, and there is, therefore, a sufficient
reason at hand why it is so. It is moreover true that Miss Miller’s poem
is connected with the fall, wherein just that erotic component comes
forth, the existence of which we have surmised above.

Miss Miller neglects to tell which passages in Job occurred to her mind.
These, unfortunately, are therefore only general suppositions. Take
first, the analogy to the Lost Paradise. Job lost all that he had, and
this was due to an act of Satan, who wished to incite him against God.
In the same way mankind, through the temptation of the serpent, lost
Paradise, and was plunged into earth’s torments. The idea, or rather the
mood which is expressed by the reference to the Lost Paradise, is Miss
Miller’s feeling that she had lost something which was connected with
satanic temptation. To her it happened, just as to Job, that she
suffered innocently, for she did not fall a victim to temptation. Job’s
sufferings are not understood by his friends;[69] no one knows that
Satan has taken a hand in the game, and that Job is truly innocent. Job
never tires of avowing his innocence. Is there a hint in that? We know
that certain neurotic and especially mentally diseased people
continually defend their innocence against non-existent attacks;
however, one discovers at a closer examination that the patient, while
he apparently defends his innocence without reason, fulfils with that a
“Deckhandlung,” the energy for which arises from just those impulses,
whose sinful character is revealed by the contents of the pretended
reproach and calumny.[70]

Job suffered doubly, on one side through the loss of his fortune, on the
other through the lack of understanding in his friends; the latter can
be seen throughout the book. The suffering of the misunderstood recalls
the figure of Cyrano de Bergerac—he too suffered doubly, on one side
through hopeless love, on the other side through misunderstanding. He
falls, as we have seen, in the last hopeless battle against “Le
Mensonge, les Compromis, les Préjugés, les Lâchetés et la Sottise.—Oui,
Vous m’arrachez tout le laurier et la rose!”

Job laments

      “God delivereth me to the ungodly,
      And casteth me into the hands of the wicked,
      I was at ease, and he brake me asunder;
      Yea, he hath taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces:

      “_He hath also set me up for his mark.
      His archers compass me round about_;
      He cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare;
      He poureth out my gall upon the ground.
      He breaketh me with breach upon breach;
      He runneth upon me like a giant.”—_Job_ xvi: 11–15.

The analogy of feeling lies in the suffering of the hopeless struggle
against the more powerful. It is as if this conflict were accompanied
from afar by the sounds of “creation,” which brings up a beautiful and
mysterious image belonging to the unconscious, and which has not yet
forced its way up to the light of the upper world. We surmise, rather
than know, that this battle has really something to do with creation,
with the struggles between negations and affirmations. The references to
Rostand’s “Cyrano” through the identification with Christian, to
Milton’s “Paradise Lost,” to the sorrows of Job, misunderstood by his
friends, betray plainly that in the soul of the poet something was
identified with these ideas. She also has suffered like Cyrano and Job,
has lost paradise, and dreams of “creation,”—creation by means of
thought—fruition through the whirlwind of Anaxagoras.[71]

We once more submit ourselves to Miss Miller’s guidance:

  “I remember that when fifteen years old, I was once very much stirred
  up over an article, read aloud to me by my mother, concerning the idea
  which spontaneously produced its object. I was so excited that I could
  not sleep all night because of thinking over and over again what that
  could mean.

  “From the age of nine to sixteen, I went every Sunday to a
  Presbyterian Church, in charge of which, at that time, was a very
  cultured minister. In one of the earliest memories which I have
  retained of him, I see myself as a very small girl sitting in a very
  large pew, continually endeavoring to keep myself awake and pay
  attention, without in the least being able to understand what he meant
  when he spoke to us of Chaos, Cosmos and the Gift of Love (don
  d’amour).”

There are also rather early memories of the awakening of puberty (nine
to sixteen) which have connected the idea of the cosmos springing from
chaos with the “don d’amour.” The medium in which these associations
occur is the memory of a certain very much honored ecclesiastic who
spoke those dark words. From the same period of time comes the
remembrance of that excitement about the idea of the “creative thought”
which from itself “produced its object.” Here are two ways of creation
intimated: the creative thought, and the mysterious reference to the
“don d’amour.”

At the time when I had not yet understood the nature of psychoanalysis,
I had a fortunate opportunity of winning through continual observation a
deep insight into the soul of a fifteen-year-old girl. Then I
discovered, with astonishment, what the contents of the unconscious
phantasies are, and how far removed they are from those which a girl of
that age shows outwardly. There are wide-reaching phantasies of truly
mythical fruitfulness. The girl was, in the split-off phantasy, the
race-mother of uncounted peoples.[72] If we deduct the poetically spoken
phantasy of the girl, elements are left which at that age are common to
all girls, for the unconscious content is to an infinitely greater
degree common to all mankind than the content of the individual
consciousness. For it is the condensation of that which is historically
the average and ordinary.

Miss Miller’s problem at this age was the common human problem: “How am
I to be creative?” Nature knows but one answer to that: “Through the
child (don d’amour!).” “But how is the child attained?” Here the
terrifying problem emerges, which, as our analytic experience shows, is
connected with the father,[73] where it cannot be solved; because the
original sin of incest weighs heavily for all time upon the human race.
The strong and natural love which binds the child to the father, turns
away in those years during which the humanity of the father would be all
too plainly recognized, to the higher forms of the father, to the
“Fathers” of the church, and to the Father God,[74] visibly represented
by them, and in that there lies still less possibility of solving the
problem. However, mythology is not lacking in consolations. Has not the
_logos_ become flesh too? Has not the divine _pneuma_, even the _logos_,
entered the Virgin’s womb and lived among us as the son of man? That
whirlwind of Anaxagoras was precisely the divine νοῦς which from out of
itself has become the world. Why do we cherish the image of the Virgin
Mother even to this day? Because it is always comforting and says
without speech or noisy sermon to the one seeking comfort, “I too have
become a mother,”—through the “idea which spontaneously produces its
object.”

I believe that there is foundation enough at hand for a sleepless night,
if those phantasies peculiar to the age of puberty were to become
possessed of this idea—the results would be immeasurable! All that is
psychologic has an under and an over meaning, as is expressed in the
profound remark of the old mystic: οὐρανὸς ἄνο, οὐρανὸς κάτο, αἰθέρα
ἄνο, αἰθέρα κάτο, πᾶν τοῦτο ἄνο, πᾶν τοῦτο κάτο, τοῦτο λαβὲ καὶ
εὐτυχει[75]—

We would show but slight justice, however, to the intellectual
originality of our author, if we were satisfied to trace back the
commotion of that sleepless night absolutely and entirely to the sexual
problem in a narrow sense. That would be but one-half, and truly, to
make use of the mystic’s expression, only the under half. The other half
is the intellectual sublimation, which strives to make true in its own
way the ambiguous expression of “the idea which produces its object
spontaneously,”—_ideal creation in place of the real_.

In such an intellectual accomplishment of an evidently very capable
personality, the prospect of a spiritual fruitfulness is something which
is worthy of the highest aspiration, since for many it will become a
necessity of life. Also this side of the phantasy explains, to a great
extent, the excitement, for it is a thought with a presentiment of the
future; one of those thoughts which arise, to use one of Maeterlinck’s
expressions,[76] from the “inconscient supérieur,” that “prospective
potency” of subliminal combinations.[77]

I have had the opportunity of observing certain cases of neuroses of
years’ duration, in which, at the time of the beginning of the illness
or shortly before, a dream occurred, often of visionary clarity. This
impressed itself inextinguishably upon the memory, and in analysis
revealed a hidden meaning to the patient which anticipated the
subsequent events of life; that is to say, their psychologic
meaning.[78] I am inclined to grant this meaning to the commotion of
that restless night, because the resulting events of life, in so far as
Miss Miller consciously and unconsciously unveils them to us, are
entirely of a nature to confirm the supposition that that moment is to
be considered as the inception and presentiment of a sublimated aim in
life.

Miss Miller concludes the list of her fancies with the following
remarks:

  “The dream seemed to me to come from a mixture of the representation
  of ‘Paradise Lost,’ ‘Job,’ and ‘Creation,’ with ideas such as ‘thought
  which spontaneously produces its object’: ‘the gift of love,’ ‘chaos,
  and cosmos.’”

In the same way as colored splinters of glass are combined in a
kaleidoscope, in her mind fragments of philosophy, æsthetics and
religion would seem to be combined—

  “under the stimulating influence of the journey, and the countries
  hurriedly seen, combined with the great silence and the indescribable
  charm of the sea. ‘Ce ne fut que cela et rien de plus.’ ‘Only this,
  and nothing more!’”

With these words, Miss Miller shows us out, politely and energetically.
Her parting words in her negation, confirmed over again in English,
leave behind a curiosity; viz., what position is to be negated by these
words? “Ce ne fut que cela et rien de plus”—that is to say, really, only
“le charme impalpable de la mer”—and the young man who sang melodiously
during the night watch is long since forgotten, and no one is to know,
least of all the dreamer, that he was a morning star, who came before
the creation of a new day.[79] One should take care lest he satisfy
himself and the reader with a sentence such as “ce ne fut que cela.”
Otherwise, it might immediately happen that one would become disturbed
again. This occurs to Miss Miller too, since she allowed an English
quotation to follow,—“Only this, and nothing more,” without giving the
source, it is true. The quotation comes from an unusually effective
poem, “The Raven” by Poe. The line referred to occurs in the following:

     “While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping
     As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door—
     ‘’Tis some visitor.’ I muttered, ‘tapping at my chamber door’—
                         Only this, and nothing more.”

The spectral raven knocks nightly at his door and reminds the poet of
his irrevocably lost “Lenore.” The raven’s name is “Nevermore,” and as a
refrain to every verse he croaks his horrible “Nevermore.” Old memories
come back tormentingly, and the spectre repeats inexorably “Nevermore.”
The poet seeks in vain to frighten away the dismal guest; he calls to
the raven:

 “‘Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend,’ I shrieked,
    upstarting—
 ‘Get thee back into the tempest and the night’s Plutonian shore!
 Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
 Leave my loneliness unbroken, quit the bust above my door!
 Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!’
                     Quoth the raven, ‘Nevermore.’”

That quotation, which, apparently, skips lightly over the situation,
“Only this, and nothing more,” comes from a text which depicts in an
affecting manner the despair over the lost Lenore. That quotation also
misleads our poet in the most striking manner. Therefore, she
undervalues the erotic impression and the wide-reaching effect of the
commotion caused by it. It is this undervaluation, which Freud has
formulated more precisely as “repression,” which is the reason why the
erotic problem does not attain directly conscious treatment, and from
this there arise “these psychologic riddles.” The erotic impression
works in the unconscious, and, in its stead, pushes symbols forth into
consciousness. Thus, one plays hide-and-seek with one’s self. First, it
is “the morning stars which sing together”; then “Paradise Lost”; then
the erotic yearning clothes itself in an ecclesiastical dress and utters
dark words about “World Creation” and finally rises into a religious
hymn to find there, at last, a way out into freedom, a way against which
the censor of the moral personality can oppose nothing more. The hymn
contains in its own peculiar character the marks of its origin. It thus
has fulfilled itself—the “Law of the Return of the Complex.” The night
singer, in this circuitous manner of the old transference to the
Father-Priest, has become the “Eternal,” the “Creator,” the _God of
Tone, of Light, of Love_.

The indirect course of the libido seems to be a way of sorrow; at least
“Paradise Lost” and the parallel reference to Job lead one to that
conclusion. If we take, in addition to this, the introductory intimation
of the identification with Christian, which we see concludes with
Cyrano, then we are furnished with material which pictures the indirect
course of the libido as truly a way of sorrow. It is the same as when
mankind, after the sinful fall, had the burden of the earthly life to
bear, or like the tortures of Job, who suffered under the power of Satan
and of God, and who himself, without suspecting it, became a plaything
of the superhuman forces which we no longer consider as metaphysical,
but as metapsychological. Faust also offers us the same exhibition of
God’s wager.

  _Mephistopheles_:

          What will you bet? There’s still a chance to gain him
          If unto me full leave you give
          Gently upon my road to train him!

  _Satan_:

  But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will
  curse thee to thy face.—_Job_ i: 11.

While in Job the two great tendencies are characterized simply as good
and bad, the problem in Faust is a pronouncedly erotic one; viz., the
battle between sublimation and eros, in which the Devil is strikingly
characterized through the fitting rôle of the erotic tempter. The erotic
is lacking in Job; at the same time Job is not conscious of the conflict
within his own soul; he even continuously disputes the arguments of his
friends who wish to convince him of evil in his own heart. To this
extent, one might say that Faust is considerably more honorable since he
openly confesses to the torments of his soul.

Miss Miller acts like Job; she says nothing, and lets the evil and the
good come from the other world, from the metapsychologic. Therefore, the
identification with Job is also significant in this respect. A wider,
and, indeed, a very important analogy remains to be mentioned. The
creative power, which love really is, rightly considered from the
natural standpoint, remains as the real attribute of the Divinity,
sublimated from the erotic impression; therefore, in the poem God is
praised throughout as Creator.

Job offers the same illustration. Satan is the destroyer of Job’s
fruitfulness. God is the fruitful one himself, therefore, at the end of
the book, he gives forth, as an expression of his own creative power,
this hymn, filled with lofty poetic beauty. In this hymn, strangely
enough, two unsympathetic representatives of the animal kingdom,
behemoth and the leviathan, both expressive of the crudest force
conceivable in nature, are given chief consideration; the behemoth being
really the phallic attribute of the God of Creation.

      “Behold now behemoth, which I made as well as thee;
      He eateth grass as an ox.
      Lo, now; his strength is in his loins,
      And his force is in the muscles of his belly.
      He moveth his tail like a cedar:
      The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
      His bones are as tubes of brass;
      His limbs are like bars of iron.
      He is the chief of the ways of God:
      He only that made him giveth him his sword....
      Behold, if a river overflow, he trembleth not;
      He is confident though a Jordan swell even to his mouth.
      Shall any take him when he is on the watch.
      Or pierce through his nose with a snare?
      Canst thou draw leviathan with a fish-hook?
      Or press down his tongue with a cord?...
      Lay thy hand upon him;
      Remember the battle and do no more.
      None is so fierce that dare stir him up:
      Who then is he that can stand before me?
      Who hath first given unto me, that I should repay him?
      Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.”
                        —_Job_ xl: 15–20, 23–24; xli: 1, 8, 10–11.

God says this in order to bring his power and omnipotence impressively
before Job’s eyes. God is like the behemoth and the leviathan; the
fruitful nature giving forth abundance,—the untamable wildness and
boundlessness of nature,—and the overwhelming danger of the unchained
power.[80]

But what has destroyed Job’s earthly paradise? The unchained power of
nature. As the poet lets it be seen here, God has simply turned his
other side outwards for once; the side which man calls the devil, and
which lets loose all the torments of nature on Job, naturally for the
purpose of discipline and training. The God who created such
monstrosities, before whom the poor weak man stiffens with anxiety,
truly must hide qualities within himself which are food for thought.
This God lives in the heart, in the unconscious, in the realm of
metapsychology. There is the source of the anxiety before the
unspeakably horrible, and of the strength to withstand the horrors. The
person, that is to say his conscious “I,” is like a plaything, like a
feather which is whirled around by different currents of air; sometimes
the sacrifice and sometimes the sacrificer, and he cannot hinder either.
The Book of Job shows us God at work both as creator and destroyer. Who
is this God? A thought which humanity in every part of the world and in
all ages has brought forth from itself and always again anew in similar
forms; a power in the other world to which man gives praise, a power
which creates as well as destroys, an idea necessary to life. Since,
psychologically understood, the divinity is nothing else than a
projected complex of representation which is accentuated in feeling
according to the degree of religiousness of the individual, so God is to
be considered as the representative of a certain sum of energy (libido).
This energy, therefore, appears projected (metaphysically) because it
works from the unconscious outwards, when it is dislodged from there, as
psychoanalysis shows. As I have earlier made apparent in the “Bedeutung
des Vaters,” the religious instinct feeds upon the incestuous libido of
the infantile period. In the principal forms of religion which now
exist, the father transference seems to be at least the moulding
influence; in older religions, it seems to be the influence of the
mother transference which creates the attributes of the divinity. The
attributes of the divinity are omnipotence, a sternly persecuting
paternalism ruling through fear (Old Testament) and a loving paternalism
(New Testament). These are the attributes of the libido in that wide
sense in which Freud has conceived this idea empirically. In certain
pagan and also in certain Christian attributes of divinity the maternal
stands out strongly, and in the former the animal also comes into the
greatest prominence.[81] Likewise, the infantile, so closely interwoven
with religious phantasies, and from time to time breaking forth so
violently, is nowhere lacking.[82] All this points to the sources of the
dynamic states of religious activity. These are those impulses which in
childhood are withdrawn from incestuous application through the
intervention of the incest barrier and which, especially at the time of
puberty, as a result of affluxes of libido coming from the still
incompletely employed sexuality, are aroused to their own peculiar
activity. As is easily understood, that which is valuable in the
God-creating idea is not the form but the power, the libido. The
primitive power which Job’s Hymn of Creation vindicates, the
unconditional and inexorable, the unjust and the superhuman, are truly
and rightly attributes of libido, which “lead us unto life,” which “let
the poor be guilty,” and against which struggle is in vain. Nothing
remains for mankind but to work in harmony with this will. Nietzsche’s
“Zarathustra” teaches us this impressively.

We see that in Miss Miller the religious hymn arising from the
unconscious is the compensating amend for the erotic; it takes a great
part of its materials from the infantile reminiscences which she
reawakened into life by the introversion of the libido. Had this
religious creation not succeeded (and also had another sublimated
application been eliminated) then Miss Miller would have yielded to the
erotic impression, either to its natural consequence or to a negative
issue, which would have replaced the lost success in love by a
correspondingly strong sorrow. It is well known that opinions are much
divided concerning the worth of this issue of an erotic conflict, such
as Miss Miller has presented to us. It is thought to be much more
beautiful to solve unnoticed an erotic tension, in the elevated feelings
of religious poetry, in which perhaps many other people can find joy and
consolation. One is wrong to storm against this conception from the
radical standpoint of fanaticism for truth.

I think that one should view with philosophic admiration the strange
paths of the libido and should investigate the purposes of its
circuitous ways.

It is not too much to say that we have herewith dug up the erotic root,
and yet the problem remains unsolved. Were there not bound up with that
a mysterious purpose, probably of the greatest biological meaning, then
certainly twenty centuries would not have yearned for it with such
intense longing. Doubtless, this sort of libidian current moves in the
same direction as, taken in the widest sense, did that ecstatic ideal of
the Middle Ages and of the ancient mystery cults, one of which became
the later Christianity. There is to be seen biologically in this ideal
an exercise of psychologic projection (of the paranoidian mechanism, as
Freud would express it).[83] The projection consists in the repressing
of the conflict into the unconscious and the setting forth of the
repressed contents into seeming objectivity, which is also the formula
of paranoia. The repression serves, as is well known, for the freeing
from a painful complex from which one must escape by all means because
its compelling and oppressing power is feared. The repression can lead
to an apparent complete suppression which corresponds to a strong
self-control. Unfortunately, however, self-control has limits which are
only too narrowly drawn. Closer observation of people shows, it is true,
that calm is maintained at the critical moment, but certain results
occur which fall into two categories.

_First_, the suppressed effect comes to the surface immediately
afterwards; seldom directly, it is true, but ordinarily in the form of a
displacement to another object (e. g. a person is, in official
relations, polite, submissive, patient, and so on, and turns his whole
anger loose upon his wife or his subordinates).

_Second_, the suppressed effect creates compensations elsewhere. For
example, people who strive for excessive ethics, who try always to
think, feel, and act altruistically and ideally, avenge themselves,
because of the impossibility of carrying out their ideals, by subtle
maliciousness, which naturally does not come into their own
consciousness as such, but which leads to misunderstandings and unhappy
situations. Apparently, then, all of these are only “especially
unfortunate circumstances,” or they are the guilt and malice of other
people, or they are tragic complications.

One is, indeed, freed of the conscious conflict, nevertheless it lies
invisible at one’s feet, and is stumbled over at every step. The technic
of the apparent suppressing and forgetting is inadequate because it is
not possible of achievement in the last analysis—it is in reality a mere
makeshift. The religious projection offers a much more effectual help.
In this one keeps the conflict in sight (care, pain, anxiety, and so on)
and gives it over to a personality standing outside of one’s self, the
Divinity. The evangelical command teaches us this:

  “Cast all your anxiety upon him, because he careth for you.”—_I Peter_
  v: 7.

  “In nothing be anxious; but in every thing by prayer and
  supplication ... let your requests be made known unto God.”—_Phil._
  iv: 6.

One must give the burdening complex of the soul consciously over to the
Deity; that is to say, associate it with a definite representation
complex which is set up as objectively real, as a person who answers
those questions, for us unanswerable. To this inner demand belongs the
candid avowal of sin and the Christian humility presuming such an
avowal. Both are for the purpose of making it possible for one to
examine one’s self and to know one’s self.[84] One may consider the
mutual avowal of sins as the most powerful support to this work of
education (“Confess, therefore, your sins one to another.”—James v: 16).
These measures aim at a conscious recognition of the conflicts,
thoroughly psychoanalytic, which is also _a conditio sine qua non_ of
the psychoanalytic condition of recovery. Just as psychoanalysis in the
hands of the physician, a secular method, sets up the real object of
transference as the one to take over the conflicts of the oppressed and
to solve them, so the Christian religion sets up the Saviour, considered
as real; “In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness
of sins....” (Eph. i: 7 and Col. i: 14.)[85] He is the deliverer and
redeemer of our guilt, a God who stands above sin, “who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth” (Pet. ii: 22). “Who his own self
bare our sins in his body upon the tree” (Pet. ii: 24). “Therefore
Christ has been sacrificed once to take away the sins of many” (Heb. ix:
28). The God, thus thought of, is distinguished as innocent in himself
and as the self-sacrificer. (These qualities are true also for that
amount of energy—libido—which belongs to the representation complex
designated the Redeemer.) The conscious projection towards which the
Christian education aims, offers, therefore, a double benefit: first,
one is kept conscious of the conflict (sins) of two opposing tendencies
mutually resistant, and through this one prevents a known trouble from
becoming, by means of repressing and forgetting, an unknown and
therefore so much more tormenting sorrow. Secondly, one lightens one’s
burden by surrendering it to him to whom all solutions are known. One
must not forget that the individual psychologic roots of the Deity, set
up as real by the pious, are concealed from him, and that he, although
unaware of this, still bears the burden alone and is still alone with
his conflict. This delusion would lead infallibly to the speedy breaking
up of the system, for Nature cannot indefinitely be deceived, but the
powerful institution of Christianity meets this situation. The command
in the book of James is the best expression of the psychologic
significance of this: “Bear ye one another’s burdens.”[86]

This is emphasized as especially important in order to preserve society
upright through mutual love (Transference); the Pauline writings leave
no doubt about this:

  “Through love be servants one to another.”—_Gal._ v: 13.

  “Let love of the brethren continue.”—_Heb._ xiii: 1.

  “And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works.
  Not forgetting our own assembling together as is the custom of some,
  but exhorting one another.”—_Heb._ x: 24–25.

We might say that the real transference taught in the Christian
community is the condition absolutely necessary for the efficacy of the
miracle of redemption; the first letter of John comes out frankly with
this:

  “He that loveth his brother abideth in the light.”—_I John_ ii: 10.

  “If we love one another, God abideth in us.”—_I John_ iv: 12.

The Deity continues to be efficacious in the Christian religion only
upon the foundation of brotherly love. Consequently, here too the
mystery of redemption is the unresisting real transference.[87] One may
properly ask one’s self, for what then is the Deity useful, if his
efficacy consists only in the _real transference_? To this also the
evangelical message has a striking answer:

  “Men are all brothers in Christ.”

  “So Christ also, having been once offered to bear the sins of many,
  shall appear a second time apart from sin to them that wait for him
  unto salvation.”—_Heb._ ix: 28.

The condition of transference among brothers is to be such as between
man and Christ, a spiritual one. As the history of ancient cults and
certain Christian sects shows, this explanation of the Christian
religion is an especially important one biologically, for the
psychologic intimacy creates certain shortened ways between men which
lead only too easily to that from which Christianity seeks to release
them, namely to the sexual relation with all those consequences and
necessities under which the really already highly civilized man had to
suffer at the beginning of our Christian era. For just as the ancient
religious experience was regarded distinctly as a bodily union with the
Deity,[88] just so was worship permeated with sexuality of every kind.
Sexuality lay only too close to the relations of people with each other.
The moral degeneracy of the first Christian century produced a moral
reaction arising out of the darkness of the lowest strata of society
which was expressed in the second and third centuries at its purest in
the two antagonistic religions, Christianity on the one side, and
Mithracism on the other. These religions strove after precisely that
higher form of social intercourse symbolic of a projected “become flesh”
idea (logos), whereby all those strongest impulsive energies of the
archaic man, formerly plunging him from one passion into another,[89]
and which seemed to the ancients like the compulsion of the evil
constellations, as εἱμαρμένη,[90] and which in the sense of later ages
might be translated as the driving force of the libido,[91] the δύναμις
κινητική[92] of Zeno, could be made use of for social preservation.[93]

It may be assumed most certainly that the domestication of humanity has
cost the greatest sacrifices. An age which produced the stoical ideal
must certainly have known why and against what it was created. The age
of Nero serves to set off effectually the famous extracts from the
forty-first letter of Seneca to Lucilius:

  “One drags the other into error, and how can we attain to salvation
  when no one bids us halt, when all the world drives us in deeper?”

  “Do you ever come across a man unafraid in danger, untouched by
  desires, happy in misfortune, peaceful in the midst of a storm,
  elevated above ordinary mortals, on the same plane as the gods, does
  not reverence seize you? Are you not compelled to say, ‘Such an
  exalted being is certainly something different from the miserable body
  which he inhabits?’ A divine strength rules there, such an excellent
  mind, full of moderation, raised above all trivialities, which smiles
  at that which we others fear or strive after: a heavenly power
  animates such a person, a thing of this kind does not exist without
  the coöperation of a deity. The largest part of such a being belongs
  to the region from which he came. Just as the sun’s rays touch the
  earth in reality and yet are at home only there from whence they come,
  so an eminent holy man associates with us. He is sent to us that we
  may learn to know the divine better, and although with us, still
  really belongs to his original home. He looks thither and reaches
  towards it; among us he walks as an exalted being.”

The people of this age had grown ripe for identification with the λόγος
(word) “become flesh,” for the founding of a new fellowship, united by
one idea,[94] in the name of which people could love each other and call
each other brothers.[95] The old vague idea of a μεσίτης (Messiah), of a
mediator in whose name new ways of love would be created, became a fact,
and with that humanity made an immense step forward. This had not been
brought about by a speculative, completely sophisticated philosophy, but
by an elementary need in the mass of people vegetating in spiritual
darkness. The profoundest necessities had evidently driven them towards
that, since humanity did not thrive in a state of dissoluteness.[96] The
meaning of those cults—I speak of Christianity and Mithracism—is clear;
it is a moral restraint of animal impulses.[97] The dynamic appearance
of both religions betrays something of that enormous feeling of
redemption which animated the first disciples and which we to-day
scarcely know how to appreciate, for these old truths are empty to us.
Most certainly we should still understand it, had our customs even a
breath of ancient brutality, for we can hardly realize in this day the
whirlwinds of the unchained libido which roared through the ancient Rome
of the Cæsars. The civilized man of the present day seems very far
removed from that. He has become merely neurotic. So for us the
necessities which brought forth Christianity have actually been lost,
since we no longer understand their meaning. We do not know against what
it had to protect us.[98] For enlightened people, the so-called
religiousness has already approached very close to a neurosis. In the
past two thousand years Christianity has done its work and has erected
barriers of repression, which protect us from the sight of our own
“sinfulness.” The elementary emotions of the libido have come to be
unknown to us, for they are carried on in the unconscious; therefore,
the belief which combats them has become hollow and empty. Let whoever
does not believe that a mask covers our religion, obtain an impression
for himself from the appearance of our modern churches, from which style
and art have long since fled.

With this we turn back to the question from which we digressed, namely,
whether or not Miss Miller has created something valuable with her poem.
If we bear in mind under what psychologic or moral conditions
Christianity came into existence; that is to say, at a time when fierce
brutality was an every-day spectacle, then we understand the religious
seizure of the whole personality and the worth of that religion which
defended the people of the Roman culture against the visible storms of
wickedness. It was not difficult for those people to remain conscious of
sin, for they saw it every day spread out before their eyes. The
religious product was at that time the accomplishment of the total
personality. Miss Miller not only undervalues her “sins,” but the
connection between the “depressing and unrelenting need” and her
religious product has even escaped her. Thus her poetical creation
completely loses the living value of a religious product. It is not much
more than a sentimental transformation of the erotic which is secretly
carried out close to consciousness and principally possesses the same
worth as the manifest content of the dream[99] with its uncertain and
delusive perishableness. Thus the poem is properly only a dream become
audible.

To the degree that the modern consciousness is eagerly busied with
things of a wholly other sort than religion, religion and its object,
original sin, have stepped into the background; that is to say, into the
unconscious in great part. Therefore, to-day man believes neither in the
one nor in the other. Consequently the Freudian school is accused of an
impure phantasy, and yet one might convince one’s self very easily with
a rather fleeting glance at the history of ancient religions and morals
as to what kind of demons are harbored in the human soul. With this
disbelief in the crudeness of human nature is bound up the disbelief in
the power of religion. The phenomenon, well known to every
psychoanalyst, of the unconscious transformation of an erotic conflict
into religious activity is something _ethically wholly worthless_ and
nothing but an hysterical production. Whoever, on the other hand, to his
conscious sin just as consciously places religion in opposition, does
something the greatness of which cannot be denied. This can be verified
by a backward glance over history. Such a procedure is sound religion.
_The unconscious recasting of the erotic into something religious lays
itself open to the reproach of a sentimental and ethically worthless
pose._

By means of the secular practice of the naïve projection which is, as we
have seen, nothing else than a veiled or indirect real-transference
(through the spiritual, through the logos), Christian training has
produced a widespread weakening of the animal nature so that a great
part of the strength of the impulses could be set free for the work of
social preservation and fruitfulness.[100] This abundance of libido, to
make use of this singular expression, pursues with a budding renaissance
(for example Petrarch) a course which outgoing antiquity had already
sketched out as religious; viz., the way of the transference to
nature.[101] The transformation of this libidinous interest is in great
part due to the Mithraic worship, which was a nature religion in the
best sense of the word;[102] while the primitive Christians exhibited
throughout an antagonistic attitude to the beauties of this world.[103]
I remember the passage of St. Augustine mentioned by J. Burckhardt:

  “Men draw thither to admire the heights of the mountains and the
  powerful waves of the sea—and to turn away from themselves.”

The foremost authority on the Mithraic cult, Franz Cumont,[104] says as
follows:

  “The gods were everywhere and mingled in all the events of daily life.
  The fire which cooked the means of nourishment for the believers and
  which warmed them; the water which quenched their thirst and cleansed
  them; also the air which they breathed, and the day which shone for
  them, were the objects of their homage. Perhaps no religion has given
  to its adherents in so large a degree as Mithracism opportunity for
  prayer and motive for devotion. When the initiated betook himself in
  the evening to the sacred grotto concealed in the solitude of the
  forest, at every step new sensations awakened in his heart some
  mystical emotion. The stars that shone in the sky, the wind that
  whispered in the foliage, the spring or brook which hastened murmuring
  to the valley, even the earth which he trod under his feet, were in
  his eyes divine; and all surrounding nature a worshipful fear of the
  infinite forces that swayed the universe.”

These fundamental thoughts of Mithracism, which, like so much else of
the ancient spiritual life, arose again from their grave during the
renaissance are to be found in the beautiful words of Seneca:[105]

  “When you enter a grove peopled with ancient trees, higher than the
  ordinary, and whose boughs are so closely interwoven that the sky
  cannot be seen, the stately shadows of the wood, the privacy of the
  place, and the awful gloom cannot but strike you, as with the presence
  of a deity, or when we see some cave at the foot of a mountain
  penetrating the rocks, not made by human hands, but hollowed out to
  great depths by nature; it fills the mind with a religious fear; we
  venerate the fountain-heads of great rivers; the sudden eruption of a
  vast body of water from the secret places of the earth, obtains an
  altar: we adore likewise the springs of warm baths, and either the
  opaque quality or immense depths, hath made some lakes sacred.”

All this disappeared in the transitory world of the Christian, only to
break forth much later when the thought of mankind had achieved that
_independence of the idea_ which could resist the æsthetic impression,
so that thought was no longer fettered by the emotional effects of the
impression, but could rise to reflective observation. Thus man entered
into a new and independent relation to nature whereby the foundation was
laid for natural science and technique. With that, however, there
entered in for the first time a displacement of the weight of interest;
there arose again real-transference which has reached its greatest
development in our time. Materialistic interest has everywhere become
paramount. Therefore, the realms of the spirit, where earlier the
greatest conflicts and developments took place, lie deserted and fallow;
the world has not only lost its God as the sentimentalists of the
nineteenth century bewail, but also to some extent has lost its soul as
well. One, therefore, cannot wonder that the discoveries and doctrines
of the Freudian school, with their wholly psychologic views, meet with
an almost universal disapproval. Through the change of the centre of
interest from the inner to the outer world, the knowledge of nature has
increased enormously in comparison with that of earlier times. By this
the anthropomorphic conception of the religious dogmas has been
definitely thrown open to question; therefore, the present-day religions
can only with the greatest difficulty close their eyes to this fact; for
not only has the intense interest been diverted from the Christian
religion, but criticism and the necessary correction have increased
correspondingly. The Christian religion seems to have fulfilled its
great biological purpose, in so far as we are able to judge. It has led
human thought to independence, and has lost its significance, therefore,
to a yet undetermined extent; in any case its dogmatic contents have
become related to Mithracism. In consideration of the fact that this
religion has rendered, nevertheless, inconceivable service to education,
one cannot reject it “eo ipso” to-day. It seems to me that we might
still make use in some way of its form of thought, and especially of its
great wisdom of life, which for two thousand years has been proven to be
particularly efficacious. The stumbling block is the _unhappy
combination of religion and morality_. That must be overcome. There
still remain traces of this strife in the soul, the lack of which in a
human being is reluctantly felt. It is hard to say in what such things
consist; for this, ideas as well as words are lacking. If, in spite of
that, I attempt to say something about it, I do it parabolically, using
Seneca’s words:[106]

  “Nothing can be more commendable and beneficial if you persevere in
  the pursuit of wisdom. It is what would be ridiculous to wish for when
  it is in your power to attain it. There is no need to lift up your
  hands to Heaven, or to pray the servant of the temple to admit you to
  the ear of the idol that your prayers may be heard the better. God is
  near thee; he is with thee. Yes, Lucilius, a holy spirit resides
  within us, the observer of good and evil, and our constant guardian.
  And as we treat him, he treats us; no good man is without a God. Could
  any one ever rise above the power of fortune without his assistance?
  It is he that inspires us with thoughts, upright, just and pure. We do
  not, indeed, pretend to say what God; but that a God dwells in the
  breast of every good man is certain.”